CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
     The  two  methods  of  character  revision  described  below  
are retraining and rebuilding. Each description defi  nes  the  
scope of the allowed revisions and includes clear guidelines 
on how to adjudicate the changes.
     Retraining involves small-scale changes to your charac-
ter, such as reallocation of feat slots and skill ranks. Such 
changes are relatively simple to apply, and they don’t usually 
lead to dramatic changes in the character’s capabilities or 
party role.
     Rebuilding, on the other hand, encompasses much broader 
alterations to your character’s identity—up to and including 
such cornerstones of identity as class and race. For that reason, 
rebuilding  can  be  achieved  only  by  completing  specifi  c  
DM-chosen quests. Since such missions typically center on 
visiting some legendary location or overcoming a tremendous 
challenge, they should always be completed in cooperation 
with your DM so that they can be woven into the storyline 
of the campaign.
     For  players  and  DMs  who  are  accustomed  to  treating  
character  creation  and  advancement  decisions  as  perma-
nent,  the  idea  of  character  revision  can  seem  strange  or  
daunting—and  some  might  even  think  of  it  as  a  form  
of cheating. Such reactions are natural, but if you think 
about it, normal people “revise” their abilities all the time. 
Skills you learn early in life are forgotten as new talents 
supplant them. For example, a foreign language mastered 
in  high  school  might  be  virtually  forgotten  only  a  few  
years later from disuse. Likewise, a college student might 
change her major halfway through her junior year, or an 
unexpected job transfer or layoff could result in a new posi-
tion in a totally different fi  eld, requiring quick mastery of 
new skills. Viewed from that perspective, allowing D&D 
characters  similar  opportunities  to  reinvent  themselves  
seems perfectly reasonable.
     Maybe your group already uses some form of character 
revision,  such  as  a  house  rule,  or  even  a  reliance  on  ad  
hoc decision-making by the DM. If your method works 
for your group, don’t let this chapter stop you from play-
ing the game your way. However, if you’re looking for a 
coherent system that balances fun and playability with 
story and believability, this chapter might be just what 
the healer ordered.
     After your character goes through the retraining or rebuild-
ing  process,  you  might  notice  that  he  doesn’t  quite  match  
the  specs  of  a  similar  character  built  up  to  the  same  level  
by the normal method. Maybe his skill points don’t add up 
quite right, or his hit points are off a bit from the expected 
value. But the small variations that crop up in this process 
don’t signifi  cantly impact play balance, and writing rules to 
eliminate them would complicate the process without really 
improving the quality of your game.
    So if you’d like to change some aspect of your character, 
give the character revision rules a try. You’ll be happier with 
your character in the long run and, more important, you’ll 
have more fun playing the game.
RETRAINING
The most basic level of character revision is retraining—that 
is, adjusting a decision you made earlier in your character’s 
career by selecting a different legal option. This technique 
represents  the  character’s  practicing  new  talents  in  lieu  of  
honing older ones. In a way, the process is similar to attain-
ing a new level. In keeping with that concept, the retraining 
option can be chosen only during level advancement.
    Six  different  character  aspects  (see  Table  8–1)  can  be  
changed through retraining. Each time your character attains 
a new level, you can select one (and only one) of these options. 
For instance, you can’t change a feat selection and your spells 
known at the same level. Since these options represent two 
different sessions of retraining, they must occur at different 
levels.
    The decision to retrain must be implemented before any 
benefi  ts of the newly attained level are applied. For example, 
if  a  10th-level  rogue  wants  to  trade  her  improved  evasion  
class feature for the opportunist class feature, she can do so 
immediately upon attaining 11th level, before she gains any 
of  the  benefi  ts  for  that  level  (such  as  additional  hit  points,  
skill points, and so on).
Table 8–1: Retraining Options
Character Aspect   Effect
Class feature Exchange one class feature option for 
                                another
Feat Exchange one feat for another for which 
                                you                                qualify
Language Exchange one language for another
Skill Trade ranks between two skills
Spell Exchange one spell known for another
Substitution level    Trade a class level for a substitution 
level
CLASS FEATURE RETRAINING
Some class features offer two or more different options, such 
as the choice of combat st yle a ranger must ma ke at 2nd level. 
Class  feature  retraining  allows  you  to  swap  out  one  such  
option for another. Maybe your ranger would prefer to be an 
archer instead of a melee fi  ghter, or your cler ic of Heironeous 
feels that the War domain would be a better option than the 
Law domain. The character remains basically the same, since 
his class levels haven’t changed, but he’s now highlighting a 
different aspect of his class.
The Process
Change one class feature option to another legal one. The new 
option must represent a choice that you could have made at 
the same level as you made the original choice. Also, the new 
choice can’t make any of your later choices illegal—though 
it might automatically change class features acquired later if 
they are based on the initial choice.
    Class features from the Player’s Handbook that are subject 
to change in this manner are given on Table 8–2. Chapter 2 
of  this  book  provides  class  feature  options  for  a  variety  of  
additional classes.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   192620_95374_Ch8.indd   1922/8/06   4:24:03 PM2/8/06   4:24:03 PM

193
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
Table 8–2: Class Feature Retraining Options
Class                        Option
Cleric* Choice of domains (each domain 
 counts as a separate choice)
Neutral cleric Choice to turn or to rebuke undead 
 (can be changed only if deity allows it)
Druid or ranger Choice of animal companion
Fighter, monk,  Choice of bonus feat
or wizard
Ranger Choice of combat style
Rogue Choice of special ability
Sorcerer or wizard   Choice of familiar
Wizard** Choice of school specialization and 
                                 prohibited                                 schools
*A cleric’s choice of deity can’t be changed by class feature 
retraining. See the Divine Conversion sidebar for details on 
how to accomplish this change.
**School specialization and prohibited schools are treated 
as a single class feature. Thus, a character could change 
one, two, or even all three choices at the same time.
 Example:  Upon  gaining  a  new  level,  a  ranger  could  
change the combat style class feature he gained at 2nd level 
from two-weapon fi ghting to archery. Thereafter, he would 
be treated as if he had the Rapid Shot feat instead of the 
Two-Weapon Fighting feat. If he had at least six levels of 
ranger before making this change, he would exchange both 
the Two-Weapon Fighting feat (gained at 2nd level) and the 
Improved  Two-Weapon  Fighting  feat  (gained  at  6th  level)  
for the appropriate archery feats, since both of these features 
are derived from the choice made at 2nd level. However, the 
ranger couldn’t make this change if he had selected the Two-
Weapon Defense feat in the interim, since losing Two-Weapon 
Fighting means he would no longer meet the prerequisites 
for that feat.
 Example:  Upon  gaining  a  new  level,  a  necromancer  
could change her school specialization to evocation, thus 
becoming an evoker. At the same time, she could also choose 
to change her prohibited schools from conjuration and illu-
sion to abjuration and transmutation. Doing so would cause 
her to lose access to all spells from the newly designated 
prohibited schools. Even if her spellbook contains one or 
more such spells, she would lose the ability to prepare and 
cast them.
 Example: Upon gaining a new level, a wizard could choose 
to specialize in the enchantment school, thereby becoming 
an enchanter. At the same time, she would have to select two 
prohibited schools, as normal for a specialist wizard.
 Example: Upon gaining a new level, a conjurer could 
choose to become a wizard. By doing so, she would lose the 
benefi ts of specialization. But since she would also lose her 
prohibited schools, she could then learn spells from those 
schools as normal.
FEAT RETRAINING
Sometimes a feat choice looks great on paper, but it just 
doesn’t work for your character in practice. Maybe an early 
feat choice ref lected the character’s personality and style, 
but a little experience changed his outlook. For instance, 
you might have selected Improved Initiative for your 1st-
level character because you pictured him as ambitious and 
a little reckless. But after falling victim to a wight’s touch 
because he just couldn’t wait until the cleric turned the 
undead, he decides it’s better to use a little more care in 
combat, causing you to regret your early feat choice. New 
supplements, with their wealth of exciting feat options, 
also provide plenty of reasons to reconsider your earlier 
feat selections.
The Process
You can exchange one of the feats you previously selected 
for another feat. If the new feat has prerequisites, not only 
must your character meet them in his current state, but you 
must also be able to show that he met them at the time you 
chose the previous feat.
 Example: A 4th-level fi  ghter/1st-level rogue couldn’t trade 
the Mobility feat he chose at 3rd level for Improved Critical 
because he doesn’t currently meet a prerequisite for the latter 
feat (base attack bonus +6). He also couldn’t trade that Mobil-
ity feat for Weapon Specialization, even though he currently 
meets the prerequisite (fi ghter level 4th), because he could 
not have done so as a 3rd-level character.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
DIVINE CONVERSION
As noted in the Player’s Handbook, a cleric who grossly violates 
the  code  of  conduct  imposed  by  his  deity  loses  all  spells  and  
class  features  and  cannot  attain  any  more  levels  as  a  cleric  of  
that  deity.  All  these  penalties  remain  in  effect  until  he  atones.  
But what if he doesn’t want to atone? What if a cleric of Hextor 
finds  new  meaning  and  purpose  in  serving  Heironeous  after  
a  dramatic  conversion  experience?  Such  a  character  need  not  
become  a  multiclass  ex-cleric  of  Hextor/cleric  of  Heironeous.  
Instead, Heironeous can simply reinstate the character’s cleric 
powers once he has proven his loyalty, talent, and ability.
    A cleric who changes his patron deity must complete a quest 
to prove his devotion to his new patron. The nature of the quest 
depends  on  the  deity,  and  it  always  clearly  reflects  the  deity’s  
alignment  as  well  as  his  or  her  goals  and  beliefs.  To  start  the  
process, the cleric must voluntarily accept a geas/quest spell cast 
by  a  higher-level  cleric  of  his  new  deity.  During  the  quest,  the  
cleric has no access to spells or cleric class features—except his 
weapon and armor proficiencies, which he does not forfeit.
    Upon completing the quest, the cleric receives the benefit of 
an atonement spell from a cleric of the new deity. The character 
then becomes a cleric of the new deity and is inducted into the 
clergy  during  an  appropriate  ceremony  of  the  DM’s  choosing.  
After selecting two of the new deity’s domains in lieu of his old 
ones, the character has all the powers and abilities of his previ-
ous cleric level, plus the granted powers of his new domains.
    This  method  is  the  only  one  by  which  a  cleric  can  change  
his deity. The retraining rules can’t be used to accomplish this 
task—it  is  simply  too  substantial  a  change  in  the  character’s  
identity (not to mention his source of power) to chalk up to a 
bit of practice in his off hours.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   193620_95374_Ch8.indd   1932/8/06   4:24:10 PM2/8/06   4:24:10 PM

194
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
LANGUAGE RETR AINING
It made a lot of sense to speak Goblin, Kobold, and Orc at 1st 
level, but now that you’re mostly fi  ghting giants, demons, and 
dragons, it would be nice to understand your new enemies. 
The Process
Subtract one language from your list of known languages 
and add a new one to the list. It doesn’t matter how your 
character earned the original language—it could have been 
an automatic language for her race, a bonus language gained 
from a high Intel l igence score, or a lang uage purchased w ith 
skill points.
SKILL RETR AINING
Some skills that are particularly valuable at lower levels 
become less useful later on, and v ice versa. For example, when 
everyone in the party is carrying a bag full of antitoxins and 
potions of cure light wounds, the need for successful Heal checks 
drops dramatically. Whether your character has skill ranks 
that aren’t as necessary as they once were, or you just want 
to adapt her to new challenges, skill retraining provides a 
simple method of adjusting your character’s capabilities in 
a small but measurable way.
The Process
Subtract up to 4 skill ranks from one skill and add an equal 
number of ranks to any one other skill (not including Speak 
Language). The skill to which you add the ranks must be a 
class skill for one of your character’s classes, including a class 
he is about to gain with his current level increase. It doesn’t 
matter whether the lost ranks were purchased as class skills 
or as cross-class skills.
 Example: You decide to give your 2nd-level ranger a level 
of the rogue class as his third character level. At this point, he 
could use the skill retraining option to lose 4 ranks in Handle 
Animal that he purchased with his ranger skill points and 
gain 4 ranks in any other ranger or rogue class skill (such as 
Survival or Disable Device). He couldn’t gain ranks in any 
skill that isn’t on either the ranger or the rogue class skill list 
(such as Spellcraft).
SPELL OR POWER RETRAINING
Much like feats, magic spells and psionic powers sometimes 
look bet ter when you select them than they do a fter you’ve 
used them for a while. And when you’re playing a character 
with a limited number of options (such as a sorcerer or a 
psychic warrior), every spell or power you choose repre-
sents a significant percentage of your character’s overall 
options. You can’t afford to have dead weight taking up 
valuable spell slots, so ditch that sleep spell now that the 
party  isn’t  facing  foes  with  low  Hit  Dice  anymore  and  
replace it with the niftier 1st-level spell you just found in 
a recent supplement.
The Process
Exchange up to two currently known spells or psionic powers 
for other spells or powers. Each new spell or power must be 
usable by the same class and of the same spell level or power 
level as the spell or power it replaces.
    Special: Bards and sorcerers already have a limited abil-
ity to learn new spells in the place of older ones (see page 
28 and page 54 of the Player’s Handbook). This method of 
retraining allows exchanges over and above what their classes 
already permit.
 Example: A sorcerer could change lightning bolt to fl  y or 
dispel magic, since all three are 3rd-level sorcerer/wizard spells, 
but he couldn’t change it to wall of ice (a 4th-level spell) or to 
cure serious wounds (a cleric spell).
 Example: A 5th-level sorcerer advancing to 6th level could 
use spell retraining to exchange up to two of his known spells 
(of any level he knows) for others of the same levels. Then he 
could exchange one 0-level or 1st-level spell for another just 
as any sorcerer could upon attaining 6th level.
SUBSTITUTION LEVEL RETRAINING
Substitution levels, as presented in Planar Handbook and 
the Races series of supplements, offer characters interesting 
ways to adjust the benefi  ts granted by their classes. A wizard 
with elf wizard substitution levels, for example, seems a 
bit different from a traditional wizard, and that difference 
reinforces her racial identity. Since most substitution level 
options are offered for relatively low class levels (many at 1st 
level), you might already have missed one or more chances 
to add such fl  avor to your character. Revising a character to 
incorporate this feature amounts to a combination of retroac-
tive continuity (“Of course I’ve always been a dwarf fi  ghter!”)  
and getting back to one’s roots (“I can’t believe I forgot/never 
learned that trick!”).
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
RETRAINING COSTS
In general, retraining is assumed to be a background activity, just 
like normal level increases are. However, if your DM’s campaign 
requires the PCs to spend time and/or money to improve their 
skills, gain feats, learn spells, or acquire class benefits (DMG 197), 
the DM can apply similar requirements when characters use the 
retraining rules presented in this chapter. The table below shows 
some suggested time and gp costs for the various retraining op-
tions. These costs are purely optional; the game works perfectly 
well without them, just as it works without requiring downtime 
in order to attain higher levels.
Retraining Option     Time GP Cost
Class feature 1 week/2 levels
1
        500        gp/week
Feat 2 weeks 50 gp
Skill                            1                            week
2
                      25                      gp
2
Spell 1 day 5 gp/spell level
Substitution level 1 week/2 levels
1
        500        gp/week
1 Based on the original level at which the class feature or sub-
stitution level is gained.
2 Per skill rank changed.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
620_95374_Ch8.indd   194620_95374_Ch8.indd   1942/8/06   4:24:17 PM2/8/06   4:24:17 PM

195
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
The Process
You can trade one of your character’s current class levels for 
a substitution level, or exchange a substitution level she cur-
rently has for a normal class level. If the level to be gained has 
prerequisites, not only must the character meet them in her 
current state, but you must also be able to show that she met 
them when you could have chosen the level originally.
     Since a substitution level is actually a collection of different 
mechanical elements, use the following guidelines to make 
the necessar y changes to your character. In al l cases, “cur rent 
level” refers to the class level currently occupying that level 
slot (probably a normal class level), and “new level” refers to 
the class level the character is gaining through the retraining 
system (probably a substitution level).
Hit  Points:  If  the  new  level  does  not  use  the  same  Hit  
Die  as  the  current  level,  don’t  reroll  your  character’s  hit  
points. Just add or subtract 1 hit point from your character’s 
current total per step of difference between the two die sizes 
(or 2 hit points per step if the new level is her fi  rst level in a 
class). For instance, if the current level has a d8 Hit Die, and 
the new level has a d10 Hit Die, your character would gain 1 
hit point (or 2 hit points if the new level is her fi  rst  level  in  
a class). Alternatively, if the new level has a d4 Hit Die, she 
would lose 2 hit points (or 4 hit points if the new level is her 
fi  rst level in a class).
Skill  List:  If  the  new  level  doesn’t  offer  any  additional  
class skills over and above those on the current level’s class 
skill  list,  make  no  changes  to  your  character’s  existing  
skill ranks. If the new level offers any class skills that 
aren’t on the class skill list of the current level, you 
can  subtract  up  to  4  skill  ranks  from  any  skill  in  
order to add the same number of ranks to any of 
the new level’s class skills.
Example:  The  dwarf  fi  ghter   racial   substitu-
tion  levels  in  Races  of  Stone  offer  Knowledge  
(dungeoneering) as an additional class skill. 
So  if  you  choose  to  retrain  your  character’s  
1st level as a fi  ghter and change it to 1st level 
as  a  dwarf  fi  ghter,  you  could  subtract  up  to  
4 ranks from any skill and add an equal 
number of ranks to Knowledge 
(dungeoneering),  in  addition  to  
the  other  changes  that  substitu-
tion level retraining allows.
 Skill  Points:  If  the  new  
level does not grant the same 
number of skill points as 
the   current   level,   you   
must adjust your char-
acter’s  skill  ranks  
appropri-
ately.   If   
the new 
level 
grants 
fewer 
skill 
points than the current level, remove 1 rank from any skill 
per  point  of  difference  between  the  two  levels.  If  the  new  
level  grants  more  skill  points  than  the  current  level,  you  
must  immediately  spend  those  skill  points  using  the  new  
level’s class skill list. For example, if your character gained 2 
skill points, you could buy 2 ranks in your new level’s class 
skills or 1 rank in a cross-class skill. You must still abide by 
the skill rank limit for your character level in this process.
 Spellcasting: If the new level changes some aspect of your 
character’s spellcasting ability (for example, if she gains or 
loses spells known or spells per day), apply these changes as 
appropriate. If she must lose one or more spells known, you 
can select the spells lost from all the legal options.
Class  Features:  If  the  new  level  offers  a  different  class  
feature in place of one from the current level, treat the situ-
ation as if you had used the class feature retraining option 
detailed  above.  If  the  new  level  simply  alters  one  of  your  
character’s existing class features, just apply the alteration.
Regdar undergoes retraining so he can learn how to wield a spiked chain
Illus. by D. Hudnut
620_95374_Ch8.indd   195620_95374_Ch8.indd   1952/8/06   4:24:25 PM2/8/06   4:24:25 PM

196
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
REBUILDING
Retraining allows you to change a small aspect of your char-
acter, but rebuilding is a much more drastic step. This method 
of character revision allows you to change your character’s 
ability scores, class levels, background, templates, or even 
race. You can change as many of these aspects at once as you 
wish, though such alterations require great effort—and often 
great sacrifi  ce as well.
     Since rebuilding constitutes such a major change in your 
character’s identity, accomplishing it isn’t simply a matter 
of erasing an entry on your character sheet and replacing it 
with new information. In essence, you are altering reality in 
order to rewrite your character’s personal history. Therefore, 
to accomplish a character rebuild, your PC must complete 
a significant and challenging quest. Two such quests are 
detailed in this chapter, each one appropriate for a range of 
character levels. For instance, the Gates of Dawn quest is 
designed for characters of 6th to 8th level. Characters who 
are lower or higher in level gain no benefi  t from completing 
the quest and in fact should be actively discouraged from 
undertaking it.
     The DM can design new character rebuild quests for your 
campaign by using the ones presented here as examples. 
Each should be appropriate for a small range of character 
levels (typically about three) and include guidelines on how 
to adjust the challenge for characters within that range.
    Ideally, a character rebuild should be a relatively rare 
event. Unless your world is par ticularly unusual, constant 
character rebuilding tends to undermine 
the believability of both the campaign and 
its story line. Therefore, the quest should 
represent a signifi  cant challenge for the characters involved. 
After all, if players consider a rebuild quest to be a cakewalk, 
they’re likely to underestimate the value of the reward.
ABILITY SCORE REBUILDING
Sometimes the ability scores you roll aren’t exactly the ones 
you’d l i ke. A nd even i f that 15 Intel l igence seemed l i ke a good 
idea at the time, perhaps it didn’t pay off quite the way you’d 
hoped in actual play. In such cases, you might eventually 
come to the conclusion that your character would be better 
off with different ability scores.
    When you rebuild ability scores, you can reduce one or 
more scores in order to increase others, though the exchange 
is not necessarily one-for-one. In effect, the process is similar 
to creating a character using the point-buy system detailed 
on page 169 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide.
    The system is intentionally designed to make improving 
high scores more costly than improving low ones, since 
improving an already high ability score usually gives a greater 
benefi  t than improving a low score. Also, reducing an ability 
score from an odd number to an even number isn’t ver y costly 
to a character, since the reduction probably doesn’t result in 
a signifi  cant change to his power.
The Process
Each time your character completes a rebuild quest, you can 
reduce one or more of his ability scores and then improve 
one or more different ability scores.
Rebuilding a character opens up 
countless possibilities for change
Illus. by S. Prescott
620_95374_Ch8.indd   196620_95374_Ch8.indd   1962/8/06   4:24:35 PM2/8/06   4:24:35 PM

197
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
     No ability score can be reduced below 8 in this fashion, and 
you can’t reduce a score that is already below 8. Furthermore, 
you can’t reduce any ability score so much that it makes one of 
your other choices (such as a feat) illegal. For example, if your 
character has Power Attack, you can’t reduce his Strength to 
less than 13.
     Determine  the  points  for  each  reduction  by  consulting  
Table 8–3. For ability scores higher than 30, simply extend 
the table by continuing the progression. Add up the points 
gained in this process.
     Next,  spend  the  total  points  you  gained  through  ability  
score reduction to improve one or more of your character’s 
other ability scores. Consult Table 8–4 to determine the cost 
of each desired improvement. Again, for ability scores higher 
than 30, extend the table by continuing the progression.
     Be sure to adjust al l other aspects of your character that 
depend on ability scores—including saving throws, skill 
modifi  ers, and the like—after you’ve rebuilt his ability scores. 
The one exception is skill ranks. A permanent Intelligence 
change doesn’t retroactively increase or reduce the skill ranks 
your character has already gained from previous levels.
CLASS LEVEL REBUILDING
From the multiclass sorcerer who’s tired of lagging behind 
in spell acquisition to the fi ghter who wishes he had taken 
a level of rogue so that he could more easily qualify for a 
desired prestige class, characters often come up short of their 
players’ expectations. Even if you haven’t made a “mistake” 
in choosing classes, it’s entirely possible that a new class or 
prestige class might offer abilities that are more appropriate 
for your character. For instance, a player whose stealthy rogue 
considers herself a spy and assassin might decide that the 
ninja class (from Complete Adventurer) better describes that 
character. If ninja wasn’t an available option when the player 
fi  rst created the character, it’s not fair to say that she made a 
mistake in taking rogue levels. A more accurate assessment 
would be that the new class better describes what the char-
acter was always meant to be.
     Your  character’s  class  levels  are  the  most  powerful  tools  
for defi  ning his role in the party, not to mention his place in 
the world. So, consider carefully any class level rebuilds that 
would  dramatically  alter  the  way  your  character  functions  
in the game—if he’s the only front-line fi  ghter in the party, 
trading  away  a  couple  of  paladin  levels  for  sorcerer  levels  
might not be the best decision.
     You can also use this method to trade out (or add in) prestige 
class levels, though i f you want to ta ke levels in a prestige class 
that’s new to your character, you must be able to demonstrate 
that he can still qualify for it using what he has gained from his 
remaining class levels. For example, a 7th-level dwarf fi  ghter  
couldn’t trade a fi  ghter level for a dwarven defender level, since 
his remaining fi  ghter levels wouldn’t allow him to meet the 
+7 base attack bonus requirement for that prestige class.
     If reallocating your character’s class levels disqualifi  es  him  
for a prestige class in which he already has one or more levels, 
he loses the benefi  t of any class features or other special abilities 
granted by that prestige class. He retains the hit points gained 
from advancing in that class, as wel l as any improvements to base 
attack bonus and base save bonuses that those levels provided. 
However, you can always use the class level rebuilding option 
to replace the now-useless prestige class levels as well—and 
you probably should, unless you’re sure that the character w i l l 
be able to meet the requirements again soon.
     Some players might fi  nd it tempting to use this method of 
character rebuilding to create a bizarre but powerful amalgam 
of classes, or to drastically rewrite a character’s history. As 
with any important character decisions, the DM and the 
player should work together to ensure that the player’s new 
vision of his character still works in the game and fi  ts  in  with  
the other characters in the party. As long as the changes don’t 
signifi cantly disrupt the game, though, players should play 
Table 8–3: Reducing Ability Scores
  Old Score New Score   Points Gained
         30         29         9
         29         28         7
         28         27         8
         27         26         6
         26         25         7
         25         24         5
         24         23         6
         23         22         4
         22         21         5
         21         20         3
         20         19         4
         19         18         2
         18         17         3
         17         16         1
         16         15         2
         15         14         1
         14         13         1
         13         12         1
         12         11         1
         11         10         1
         10         9         1
          9          8          1
Table 8–4: Improving Ability Scores
  Old Score New Score Point Cost
         30         31         10
         29         30         9
         28         29         9
         27         28         8
         26         27         8
         25         26         7
         24         25         7
         23         24         6
         22         23         6
         21         22         5
         20         21         5
         19         20         4
         18         19         4
         17         18         3
         16         17         3
         15         16         2
         14         15         2
         13         14         1
         12         13         1
         11         12         1
         10         11         1
Improving an ability score of less than 10 costs 1 point.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   197620_95374_Ch8.indd   1972/8/06   4:24:47 PM2/8/06   4:24:47 PM

198
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
characters  that  they  fi  nd  enjoyable,  and  if  swapping  out  a  
couple of class levels accomplishes that goal, then doing so 
is well worth the effort.
The Process
Each time your character completes a rebuild quest, you can 
change  a  number  of  levels  equal  to  1/5  his  character  level  
(rounded up) from one class to any other class (or classes). For 
example, a 5th-level sorcerer could trade a sorcerer level for a 
single level of any other class, while a 12th-level barbarian/4th-
level  fi  ghter  could  trade  up  to  four  of  his  class  levels  (any  
combination of fi ghter and barbarian) for other class levels 
of his choice.
    Since every class level is a composite of several different 
elements,  use  the  following  step-by-step  process  to  adjust  
your character.
 Base Attack and Base Save Bonuses: Adjust these bonuses 
to match your new array of class levels, just as if you had 
created a brand-new character with those classes.
 Hit Points: If the new class level does not use the same 
Hit Die as the current level, don’t reroll your character’s hit 
points. Just add or subtract 1 hit point from your character’s 
current total per step of difference between the two die sizes 
(or 2 hit points per step if the new level is his fi  rst level in a 
class). For instance, if you trade a fi  ghter level (d10 Hit Die) 
to gain a barbarian level (d12 Hit Die), your character would 
gain 1 hit point (or 2 hit points if the new level is his fi  rst  level  
of barbarian). If you traded that fi  ghter  level  for  a  sorcerer  
level (d4 Hit Die), your character would lose 3 hit points (or 
6 hit points if the new level is his fi  rst level of sorcerer).
 Skill Points: If the new class level grants the same number 
of skill points as the current level does, you don’t have to make 
any changes to your character’s skill ranks. Even if the class 
skill lists are widely different, it’s generally more work than 
it’s worth to fi ddle around with skill ranks in this manner. 
If you wish, you can also use the skill retraining option (see 
page 194) to adjust some of your skill ranks.
    If the new level does not grant the same number of skill 
points as the current level, you must adjust your character’s 
skill ranks appropriately. If the new level grants fewer skill 
points than the current level, remove 1 rank from any skill 
per  point  of  difference  between  the  two  levels.  If  the  new  
level  grants  more  skill  points  than  the  current  level,  you  
must  immediately  spend  those  skill  points  using  the  new  
level’s class skill list. For example, trading a fi ghter level to 
gain a barbarian level would grant 2 skill points to a character 
with  Intelligence  10.  With  those  extra  points,  you  could  
buy 2 ranks of barbarian class skills or 1 rank of a barbarian 
cross-class skill. You must still abide by the skill rank limit 
for your character’s level in this process.
 Spells: If you added or subtracted any levels from a spell-
casting class, adjust your character’s spells per day and spells 
known appropriately. You can choose any spells the character 
must lose from his entire repertoire of the appropriate spell 
level. For example, a 5th-level sorcerer who becomes a 4th-level 
sorcerer/1st-level rogue must lose one 1st-level and one 2nd-
level sorcerer spell, but you can choose these freely—they need 
not be the ones the character actually learned at 5th level.
 Class Features: Eliminate any class features the char-
acter no longer possesses and add those he gains from his 
new levels.
RACE REBUILDING
Changing your character’s race is a major decision, since it has 
probably affected many of the decisions he has made during 
his adventuring career. Still, the concept of major physical 
transformation isn’t unknown in fantasy, so a character might 
well seek to recreate himself as an entirely different person. 
Perhaps you really want to try out a race featured in a new 
book, or you’ve fi  nally reached a high enough level to play 
the monstrous character you’ve always wanted. Whatever 
your reason, the race rebuilding rules show you how to keep 
playing the same person in a new body.
    This method of rebuilding can also be used to recreate 
characters brought back by reincarnate and similar effects that 
restore characters to life as members of different races.
The Process
Each time your character completes a rebuild quest, you 
can change his race. First, remove all racial traits (including 
ability score modifi  ers) granted by your character’s original 
race. Then add all the racial traits and ability score modifi  ers  
from the new race. The character’s known languages don’t 
change unless you also choose the lang uage retraining option 
(see page 194).
     So far the process sounds simple, right? Unfortunately, it isn’t 
always easy. Many potential complications can arise from this 
aspect of character rebuilding. The sections below demonstrate 
how to handle the various issues that might arise.
 Feat: If a change of race means that your character no 
longer qualifi  es for a feat she already has, she loses access to 
the feat, as well as to any others for which it is a prerequisite. 
However, the feat still occupies a feat slot unless you also use 
the feat retraining option (see page 193).
 Prestige  Class:  If  a  change  of  race  disqualifies  the  
character for a prestige class in which she already has one 
or more levels, she loses the benefi t of any class features or 
other special abilities granted by that prestige class. She 
retains the hit points gained from advancing in that class, as 
wel l as any improvements to base at tack bonus and base save 
bonuses that those levels provided. However, you can use 
the class level rebuilding option to replace the now-useless 
prestige class levels—and you probably should, unless you’re 
sure that the character will be able to meet the requirements 
again soon.
 Racial Substitution Level: Changing your character ’s race 
might wel l mean that any racial substit ution levels (detai led in 
the Races series of supplements) she has are no longer appropri-
ate. Treat this situation as if you were replacing one class level 
with another (see Class Level Rebuilding, page 197).
 Level Adjustment: If your character’s original race had 
a higher level adjustment than her new race does, you can 
replace any lost level adjustment “points” with the same 
number of new class levels of your choice.
    If the new race has a higher level adjustment than the 
original race did, you must remove class levels until the 
620_95374_Ch8.indd   198620_95374_Ch8.indd   1982/8/06   4:24:54 PM2/8/06   4:24:54 PM

199
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
character’s effective character level is the same as it was before 
the rebuilding occurred. You can choose the levels lost from 
all  those  that  the  character  has,  regardless  of  the  order  in  
which they were gained.
 Racial Hit Dice: Adding or subtracting racial Hit Dice is 
perhaps the most complicated part of character rebuilding. 
Work w ith your DM to ensure that he approves of this degree 
of change and that you’re doing it correctly.
    If your character’s original race had any racial Hit Dice, 
you must remove all the benefi  ts they granted. This process is 
similar to removing class levels (see Class Level Rebuilding, 
page 197). Next, replace these racial Hit Dice with class levels 
of your choice until the character’s effective character level 
is the same as it was before the rebuilding occurred.
    If your character’s new race has any racial Hit Dice, you 
must subtract class levels until his effective character level 
is  the  same  as  it  was  before  the  rebuilding  occurred.  You  
can choose the lost levels from all those the character has, 
regardless of the order in which they were gained.
TEMPLATE REBUILDING
Admit it—when fi  ghting lycanthropes, you’ve been tempted 
at least once to let your character get bitten, in hopes that the 
wound infects him. Such a desire is perfectly normal—it’s 
hard to look at the hybrid form ability modifi ers for, say, a 
werebear  and  not  imagine  the  sheer  devastation  that  your  
character could wreak if he had that template.
     Lycanthropy isn’t the easiest template to pick up during an 
adventuring career, but it’s certainly not the only interesting 
option. Whether you’ve dreamed of playing a celestial dwarf, 
a half-dragon elf, or a vampire halfl  ing (don’t worry, we won’t 
tell), templates offer the promise of a tantalizingly different 
character that can’t be created from mere class levels.
     Adding  a  template  can  represent  a  pretty  big  change  for  
your character, so make sure your choice is acceptable to your 
DM before proceeding. After all, transforming your chaotic 
good elf wizard into a vampire might not be appropriate for 
the  style  of  play  the  DM  has  in  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  
“realizing” your character’s celestial heritage by adding that 
template represents a much smaller overall shift in identity 
and would probably cause no problem at all.
     To uti l ize this rebui ld, your character must be able to adopt 
the template you want to gain. For example, a warforged fi  ghter  
(a living construct from the EBERRON campaign setting) can’t 
become a vampire, since that template can be applied only 
to humanoids and monstrous humanoids.
    This rebuilding option also works reasonably well for 
a character who picks up a template during play (from a 
weretiger’s bite, for example), if the DM wants the character’s 
effective character level to remain consistent with the rest of 
the party. If a difference in effective character level isn’t an 
issue, don’t worry about these rules—just add the template 
and move on with your game.
The Process
Each time your character completes a rebuild quest, you can 
add, subtract, or replace one template. For example, a dwarf 
paladin  could  gain  the  celestial  template,  a  half-dragon  elf  
fi ghter could lose the half-dragon template, or a celestial 
human rogue could replace his celestial template with the 
fi  endish  template.
     Adding a template is a lot like changing your character’s 
race, except that he usually doesn’t lose many (if any) existing 
racial abilities. Follow the guidelines presented in the Race 
Rebuilding section above, paying special attention to the 
information on gaining or losing Hit Dice and level adjust-
ment. If the character’s Hit Die size changes (for instance, 
from transformation into a vampire), use the Hit Points entry 
in the Class Rebuilding section above to determine the new 
hit point total.
     Removing an existing template, on the other hand, requires 
you to eliminate any of the template’s effects and benefi  ts,  which  
might include special attacks, special qualities, skill modifi  ers,  
ability modifi  ers, bonus feats, and a variety of other bits and 
pieces. Use the guidelines in the Race Rebuilding and Class 
Rebuilding sections to rework your character’s statistics.
REBUILD QUESTS
Note: This section addresses the DM and is intended primarily 
for his or her eyes.
    A quest to rebuild a character should excite and frighten 
players.  It’s  an  adventure  few  characters  would  willingly  
embark upon and fewer still could survive. To make rebuild-
ing an option at all levels of play, however, the degree of 
challenge must change according to the PCs’ level.
    The two example locations below outline ideas for rebuild 
quest objectives, each of which is suitable for a range of character 
levels. You can use them as described, modify them to suit 
your needs, or devise your own rebuild quest objectives.
     Each  objective  represents  the  fi  nal  encounter  before  a  
character can undergo rebuilding. The PCs might need to 
embark on a perilous overland journey or a long dungeon 
crawl to get to this encounter, or they might take a short break 
from an ongoing adventure to teleport there and have one or 
more encounters before returning. Set up the preliminary 
adventures  in  whatever  way  best  fi  ts  your  game  and  your  
players’ desires.
REBUILD QUESTS IN THE GAME
The rebuild quest objectives described here are designed to 
allow any type of character rebuild, but in your game, each 
might allow only particular kinds of rebuilds. Creating dif-
ferent quests for different rebuilds not only makes each one 
seem more signifi  cant, but it also helps to curtail unplanned 
rebuilding  by  players  who  are  largely  satisfi ed with their 
characters. (“Well, as long as he’s here, Gravar Orc-Killer is 
going  to  turn  into  a  half-celestial  umber  hulk.”)  Below  are  
some suggestions for making these locations serve particular 
needs that suit their ambiance.
 The Gates of Dawn: Character rebuilds relating to divine 
magic and fey would be particularly appropriate for this 
location, as would any kind of rebuild that could be viewed 
as redemption (for example, exchanging rogue or ninja levels 
for fi  ghter levels, changing fi  ghter levels into paladin levels, 
or increasing Wisdom).
620_95374_Ch8.indd   199620_95374_Ch8.indd   1992/8/06   4:25:01 PM2/8/06   4:25:01 PM

200
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
 The Necrotic Cradle: Character rebuilds that relate to 
necromancy (both undeath and aspects of the physical body) 
seem particularly appropriate for the Necrotic Cradle. This 
location might allow any or all of the following rebuilds: 
return an undead character to life, exchange life for undeath 
at the cost of an appropriate number of character levels, 
change ability scores, or exchange class levels or prestige 
class levels for necromancy-themed class levels or prestige 
class levels.
THE GATES OF DAWN (LEVELS 6–8)
“Travel to the Lost Isle to become lost. Leave it to fi nd yourself anew.”
—The wizard Faldor Stardust, formerly a druid
Knowing oneself generally leads to a sense of belonging, 
but wishing to change one’s essential being can bring about 
a sense of loss. At the Gates of Dawn, characters can lose 
and find themselves, and in that finding rediscover their 
true selves.
     The Lost Isle fl  oats in a hundred lonely lakes and in none 
of them. A place of mysterious magic, it appears out of the 
dawn mist on foggy days and then vanishes again when the 
sun burns the mist away. Tales told at fi  reside discourage the 
curious  from  visiting  this  fey  place,  warning  that  most  of  
those who go there never return, and those who do always 
come back profoundly changed.
    The Lost Isle might appear in a distant forest lake, or a 
crystal-clear pool high in the mountains, or a body of water 
within an area that some race considers sacrosanct. The jour-
ney to the island could be part of the adventure. Perhaps the 
PCs must give a great gift to the creatures that guard the lands 
around the lake, or sneak past them to avoid being slain on 
sight. Alternatively, the PCs might have to go to a lake where 
the island has appeared before and wait until conditions are 
right for it to come again, weathering assaults by the native 
creatures in the meantime.
Lore of the Lost Isle and the Gates of Dawn
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana), Knowledge 
(local), Knowledge (nature), or Knowledge (religion) can 
research the Lost Isle and the Gates of Dawn to learn more 
about these places. When a character makes a skill check, 
read or paraphrase the appropriate information from one 
of the following tables, including the information from 
lower DCs.
    If the PCs are just looking for a place to rebuild and want 
to know if they have heard about such a site, use the entire 
table. If they have heard of the Lost Isle speci fi  cally and want 
to see whether they know more about it, reveal information 
only for check results of 20 or higher.
    After getting information from a Knowledge check, the 
characters should be able to learn more about the Lost Isle 
by consulting village elders who know the old tales, using 
divination magic, or trying to fi  nd individuals who were ref-
erenced in the information they have gained. Such resources 
can reveal the information for Knowledge DCs higher than 
the PCs’ check results, or other any information about the 
Lost Isle that you’d like the characters to have.
Knowledge (arcana)
DC     Result
20  Certain places of power allow those with mettle to 
change themselves in strange and wondrous ways. 
In some such places, a person can change nearly any 
aspect of her being that she does not like, including 
race, weaknesses, abilities, and even personal history.
Knowledge (local) 
DC     Result
15 Old stories tell of a place called the Lost Isle. These 
legends hold that people who return from this place 
are always profoundly changed.
20  The Lost Isle is a mist-shrouded island that sometimes 
appears in lakes and large ponds in various parts of 
the world. Most who visit it don’t come back, and 
those who do are never the same again.
25 A fisherman disappeared while fishing one day, 
and everyone thought he had drowned. Two years 
later, a ranger came to his village claiming to be the 
fisherman, though he didn’t resemble the lost man 
in the slightest. He said he had been to the Lost 
Isle and passed through the Gates of Dawn. The 
fisherman’s wife had remarried and wanted nothing 
to do with the stranger, so he left.
30  The lost fi sherman was named Brent Vostig, and his 
village was Milford. He disappeared while fi shing in 
the nearby Misty Lake.
35 Beautiful music is often heard on the shores of the 
body of water in which the Lost Isle appears. Those 
who hear it should stop up their ears, because the 
melody calls them to death.
Knowledge (nature) 
DC     Result
15  Those who visit a certain fey place called the Lost 
Isle either return profoundly changed or never return 
at all.
20  The Lost Isle appears in a lake or other body of water 
somewhere in the world at dawn each day. As soon 
as the sun and wind disperse the fog surrounding 
the misty island, it vanishes.
25  Rumor holds that a fey creature lives on the Lost Isle 
as its caretaker.
Knowledge (religion) 
DC     Result
20 Certain places of power allow those with mettle to 
change themselves in strange and wondrous ways. 
Rumor holds that in some such places, a person 
can ignore the plans of the gods and even change 
his race.
25  The god Pelor created the Gates of Dawn as a 
place where the worthy might fi nd a” new dawn” 
by changing themselves in some fundamental way. 
Eventually, however, he had to take the privilege 
away from mortals due to their misuse of it.
30 The Gates of Dawn exist on the Lost Isle, a place that 
appears only at sunrise in certain lakes. Only the most 
worthy of Pelor’s followers have seen it, and the last 
reported sighting was at least a hundred years ago.
35 When Pelor hid the Gates of Dawn, he cursed some 
creature to remain on the island as its guardian. No 
church records of this ancient event remain, but 
legend has it that the curse was punishment for foul 
acts committed against Pelor’s faithful.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   200620_95374_Ch8.indd   2002/8/06   4:25:08 PM2/8/06   4:25:08 PM

201
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
Random Encounters
Characters traveling to the Lost Isle might encounter several 
dangerous threats before reaching it. You can either roll 1d4 
times on the table below for encounters, or select a few that 
you prefer. Even if the journey to the Lost Isle is supposed to be 
only a brief detour from the current adventure, consider giving 
the PCs a few warmup encounters with the creatures that lair 
near the island before they reach the Gates of Dawn.
Lost Isle Encounters
  d%  Encounter  EL
1–20 2 sea hags (MM 144) 6
21–40    Will-o’-wisp    (MM 255) 6
41–60    2 trolls or scrags (MM 58) 7
61–80    Huge water elemental (MM 110 ) 7
81–90     Athach     (MM 21) 8
91–100   Treant   (MM 244) 8
The Isle
The Lost Isle appears in a mist-covered lake at dawn every 
morning. It remains for 1 hour, or until the sun and wind 
disperse the fog from the lake. At that point, the island and 
all its occupants are transferred to another lake elsewhere in 
the world—often hundreds of miles distant—where a foggy 
dawn is occurring. If no such lake is available, the island 
instead appears somewhere on Belierin, the third layer of 
Elysium (DMG 165), until a lake on the Material Plane has 
the proper conditions to host it.
    Read or paraphrase the following text when the Lost Isle 
appears.
The fog coils thickly over the dark waters of the lake as the sky gradu-
ally brightens from night-blue to predawn gray. A faint pinkness 
on the horizon grows slowly into a blurry sliver of crimson as the 
sun rises, casting its warm glow through the mist. As the fi rst light 
of dawn falls on the lake, a curling billow of fog rolls aside like a 
parted curtain, revealing the outline of a forested island fl  oating in 
the mist-covered water. Moments later, the sweet notes of a distant 
pipe drift out over the lake. Sometimes lilting and happy, sometimes 
slow and sad, the distant melody seems to call to its listeners, cajol-
ing them closer.
A satyr named Fauldwick who long ago committed a ter-
rible transgression against Pelor’s worshipers was cursed 
by the god to remain on the island forever as caretaker 
and guardian of the Gates of Dawn. The satyr is effectively 
immortal—he does not age, and if slain, he reappears alive 
and wel l on the Lost Isle the nex t time it appears. Fauldw ick 
can leave the island, but when it reappears in another place, 
he goes w ith it, no mat ter how far he was from the la ke when 
it vanished.
    Fauldwick has lost track of how long he has lived on the 
Lost Isle. Over the centuries, loneliness has driven him quite 
Fauldwick the satyr, trapped on the Lost Isle until the end of time
Illus. by M. May
620_95374_Ch8.indd   201620_95374_Ch8.indd   2012/8/06   4:25:16 PM2/8/06   4:25:16 PM

202
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
mad, despite the company of the blink dogs and the invisible 
stalkers that Pelor has placed there to serve him. Fauldwick’s 
piping is the source of the music that the PCs hear.
The Clearing
When the characters arrive, an invisible stalker that was fl ying 
above the island to watch for visitors reports their whereabouts 
to Fauldw ick, who then tr ies to lead them to the Gates of Dawn 
with his music. He stays in the woods where the PCs can’t see 
him and moves slowly toward the gates while he plays. The 
invisible stalker (or stalkers; see Creatures, below) provides 
reconnaissance but fl  ees from combat until Fauldwick com-
mands it to fi  ght.
     If the PCs ignore Fauldwick’s music, allow them to explore 
the Lost Isle as they wish, but they still have only an hour at 
most before the island vanishes. Describe the gradual clear-
ing of the mist and the brightening of the sunlight through 
the trees at every opportunity. If they grow bored with their 
exploration, a random encounter with a will-o’-wisp or two 
might be appropriate.
Approaching the Gates: When the PCs near the Gates 
of Dawn, read or paraphrase the following text.
The sweet music seems to swell and grow louder. A quick glance 
through the trees reveals an immense, grassy field studded by 
shrubs. Dozens of man-sized, oblong hummocks dot the field, and 
objects jut up from the ground near many of them—a rusted 
sword  here,  a  graying  wooden  oar  there,  a  necklace  of  shells  
dangling  from  a  stick  over  there.  A  well-trodden  path  wends  
through these grassy hills, ending at pair of rusted iron gates 
in  the  side  of  a  huge,  open-topped,  circular  structure  made  of  
a stone so light in color that it almost blends with the fog. The 
gates, which are at least 20 feet wide and nearly twice that tall, 
appear to be slightly ajar, and the music seems to be coming from 
somewhere beyond them.
Over the years, Fauldwick has trapped many individuals on 
the Lost Isle. Some died here of old age and others were mur-
dered by Fauldwick when they attempted to leave. Fauldwick 
buries each such unfortunate aboveground in a makeshift 
graveyard outside the entrance to the building that holds 
the Gates of Dawn, placing an item the individual wore or 
carried  at  the  head  of  the  resulting  hummock  as  a  sort  of  
grave marker.
    When the PCs come close enough to enter the map, they 
can see into the building. Read or paraphrase the following 
text at that point.
Inside the structure stands a second set of gates the same size as the 
rusted iron ones. These inner gates are attached to a pair of thick 
pillars and seem to be made of brilliant gold. Other smaller pillars 
stand around this huge structure in a symmetrical arrangement.
     In a moment, a humanlike creature with a ram’s horns and legs 
dances into view, playing a set of pipes. A few dogs scamper up to 
him and excitedly jump and gambol about his legs. The creature 
stops playing and dancing for a moment and shouts, “Come and 
dance! Come and dance! Dance before the Gates of Dawn!” Then 
he goes back to playing and prancing with his dogs.
Fauldwick doesn’t reply to any questions the PCs ask; he merely 
continues to play his pipes and wave the visitors closer. When 
at least one character has come through the rusted gates, he 
stops playing to greet that person.
 Rusted Gates: The iron gates are rusted fi rmly in place. 
Medium and Small creatures must squeeze through the 
opening to get in.
Gates: 1 in. thick, hardness 10, hp 30, break DC 24, DC 30 
Strength check to move.
Creatures: Creatures for three separate encounters are 
provided below. Choose a set that has an EL 3 higher than 
the average PC level of the party.
 EL 9: One invisible stalker (MM 160), one satyr with pipes 
(MM 219), and four blink dogs (MM 28).
 EL 10 : Two invisible stalkers (MM 160), one satyr with pipes 
(MM 219), and four blink dogs (MM 28).
 EL 11: Three invisible stalkers (MM 160), one satyr with 
pipes (MM 219), and four blink dogs (MM 28).
 Tactics:  After  greeting  the  PCs,  Fauldwick  attempts  to  
convince them to stay with him on the island using the 
charm person effect of his music. If any PC refuses or resists, 
Fauldwick orders his blink dogs and invisible stalkers to 
attack. The invisible stalkers concentrate on any airborne 
foes, while the blink dogs harry those on foot. Fauldwick 
remains in the rear, readying an action to attack with his 
shortbow whenever someone tries to cast a spell. If it seems 
useful, Fauldwick commands a blink dog to go through the 
Gates of Dawn, then shuts his eyes and hopes the PCs will 
be blinded (see below).
620_95374_Ch8.indd   202620_95374_Ch8.indd   2022/8/06   4:25:26 PM2/8/06   4:25:26 PM

203
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
The Gates of Dawn
The Gates of Dawn are made of solid gold, and they swing 
open easily. Whenever any creature moves through them in 
either direction, the gates emit a blinding fl  ash of light. At 
that point, every creature within the Gates of Dawn structure 
must make a DC 15 Fortitude save or be blinded for 1d4 
rounds. Creatures that succeed on the save are dazzled for 
1d4 rounds.
     Any creature that passes through the Gates of Dawn imme-
diately changes in the manner desired (that is, the planned 
rebuild instantly takes effect), but it also falls unconscious 
for 1 hour, even if it is a construct, undead, or other creature 
that does not need to sleep or is immune to sleep ef fects. A ny 
attempt to damage the Gates of Dawn causes the perpetrator 
to fall unconscious in the same manner.
 Development: If the PCs want to help Fauldwick break 
his curse, a remove curse spell isn’t enough. Fauldwick must 
honestly repent his misdeeds, both those he committed in 
the  distant  past  and  those  he  has  committed  since  he  has  
been on the island. Thereafter, he must receive an atonement 
spell from a cleric of Pelor. After being trapped on the island 
for so long, however, Fauldwick no longer has any interest in 
apologizing for his actions.
Returning to the Lost Isle
If the PCs want to return to the Lost Isle for another rebuild, 
you have many options. Fauldwick is still there, and he might 
have new charmed or willing allies. Alternatively, some new 
creatures, such as fey or powerful out siders, might also have 
moved in to help guard the Gates of Dawn.
     If you don’t want the PCs to use the same rebuild location a 
second time, the Lost Isle might never appear to them again. 
Or perhaps it does appear, but the Gates of Dawn have been 
destroyed by Fauldwick. For this greater transgression, Pelor 
has  further  punished  the  satyr  by  turning  him  into  some  
much more more terrible creature.
THE NECROTIC CRADLE 
(LEVELS 13–15)
“You must journey through the lands of the dead to be reborn.”
—The dwarf Taklinn Ungart, previously a human
Encountering  death  and  the  undead  can  spark  a  deep  and  
full reevaluation of life. In the Necrotic Cradle, characters 
can face their own mortality and remake the threads of life 
that brought them to their current existence.
     The Necrotic Cradle lies hidden in a place notorious for its 
connection to undead, but its exact location and the nature of 
the dangers it holds were lost with the lives of the creatures 
that now haunt the area as undead. Few living beings know 
about the Necrotic Cradle, and fewer still believe it actually 
exists.  A  few  nearly  lost  legends,  however,  say  that  it  is  a  
place where birth, death, life, and undeath meet and become 
indistinguishable from one another.
     The  Necrotic  Cradle  might  lie  hidden  beneath  a  city  of  
the dead, or within an ancient burial ground that has served 
many races, or at the heart of a dark land haunted by undead 
creatures.  The  journey  to  this  place  could  be  part  of  the  
adventure. Perhaps the PCs need to talk to undead creatures 
they might ordinarily attack on sight, or maybe they have to 
help one undead creature in its struggle against another to 
learn the location of the Necrotic Cradle.
Lore of the Necrotic Cradle
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana), Knowledge 
(local), or Knowledge (religion) can research the Nectoric 
Cradle to learn more about it. When a character makes a 
skill check, read or paraphrase the appropriate information 
from one of the following tables, including the information 
from lower DCs.
    If the PCs are just looking for a place to rebuild and want 
to know if they have heard about such a site, use the entire 
table. If they have heard of the Nectoric Cradle specifi cally 
and  want  to  see  whether  they  know  more  about  it,  reveal  
information only for check results of 25 or higher.
Knowledge (arcana)
DC     Result
20  Certain places of power allow those with mettle to 
change themselves in strange and wondrous ways. 
In some such places, an individual can change 
nearly any aspect of his being that he does not 
like, including race, weaknesses, abilities, and even 
personal history.
25  The Necrotic Cradle is a place where an imbalance 
exists in the world’s magic. Powerful individuals can 
use that imbalance to alter themselves.
30  The Necrotic Cradle is suffused with strange 
necromantic and transmutative energies that can 
break the boundaries of life and death. Such forces 
are likely to attract undead, but they might also 
attract outsiders and other strange beings.
      The Necrotic Cradle is located beneath the 
dead city of Drathmere (or under Tomb Tor in the 
Deathlands, or any other place you care to put it).
35              The Necrotic Cradle probably has a guardian, and 
that guardian might be an inevitable—a thinking 
construct that concerns itself with the laws of the 
universe. A place such as the Necrotic Cradle, which 
breaks universal laws, could certainly be perceived 
as a threat by such creatures.
Knowledge (local) 
DC     Result
20 About 10 years ago, a fallen paladin sought a 
legendary place where he could redeem himself. 
Legend has it that he emerged from that place not 
only redeemed, but also reborn.
25  The paladin was a human who had been transformed 
into a vampire by the bite of one of those unholy 
creatures. The place in which he sought redemption 
was called the Necrotic Cradle.
30 A vampire paladin went to the Necrotic Cradle with 
several companions, but only he returned. Rumors 
say after he was restored to full-fledged life, he 
sought absolution for some crime at the church 
where he had received his training.
35 The paladin, whose name was Tanneth Silverwright, 
was refused atonement for his evil deeds as a 
vampire. Thereafter, he dropped into anonymity and 
became a drunkard.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   203620_95374_Ch8.indd   2032/8/06   4:25:35 PM2/8/06   4:25:35 PM

204
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
    After getting information from a Knowledge check, the 
characters should be able to learn more about the Necrotic 
Cradle by consulting sages, searching through a great library, 
using divination magic, or trying to fi  nd  individuals  who  
were referenced in the information they have gained. Such 
resources can reveal the information for Knowledge DCs 
higher than the PCs’ check results, or other any information 
about the Necrotic Cradle that you’d like the characters 
to have.
Random Encounters
Characters traveling to the Necrotic Cradle might encounter 
several dangerous threats before reaching it. You can either 
roll 1d4 times on the table below for encounters, or select 
a few that you prefer. Even if the journey to the Necrotic 
Cradle is supposed to be only a brief detour from the cur-
rent  adventure,  consider  giving  the  PCs  a  few  warmup  
encounters with the creatures drawn to the location by the 
necromantic energy of the place and its connection to both 
life and death.
Necrotic Cradle Encounters
  d%  Encounter  EL
01–10     Ice devil (MM 56) 13
11–30     2 kolyaruts (MM 159) 14
31–40    Nalfeshnee    (MM 45) 14
41–60    4 devourers (MM 58) 15
61–80    4 dread wraiths (MM 258) 15
81–90     2 nightwings (MM 197) 16
91–100   Glabrezu   (MM 166) and  16
 10 Nessian warhounds (MM 151)
The Cradle Entrance Cavern
The transmutation magic that fl  ows through the Necrotic 
Cradle redirects any attempts to teleport into or out of it. Thus, 
whether the PCs arrive by magic or on foot after traversing 
catacombs filled with undead, they first see the Necrotic 
Cradle from the cavern directly outside it.
     Read or paraphrase the following text when the PCs arrive 
outside the cavern.
A sense of foreboding hangs almost palpably in the air within this 
cavern. Ahead, an opening in the rock wall admits a beam of bril-
liant light that silhouettes a titanic armored fi gure standing just 
before the aperture. Beyond it lies a yawning abyss of utter blackness, 
and beyond that is the source of the light—a bulbous hemisphere 
of stone projecting from the cavern wall on the other side of the 
abyss. This enormous rock formation looks anything but natural. 
Black cracks in the stone, like the veins in an eye, reach up from 
the abyss to surround a gaping hole in the center of the projecting 
rock. Through that aperture shines the light.
The silhouetted fi  gure is a marut—an inevitable charged with 
guarding the Necrotic Cradle. Concerned with the unnatural 
blending of l i fe and death in this place, it war ns v isitors away 
from the Necrotic Cradle and attempts to destroy any who 
persist in trying to bypass it.
    The cavern is roughly 40 feet high, and the light beam-
ing from the Necrotic Cradle provides bright illumination 
equivalent to that of daylight. Some areas of the cavern count 
as diffi  cult terrain because of the rubble that has fallen from 
the ceiling.
Dark Abyss
The Dark Abyss on the map is actually a planar rupture that 
leads to the Plane of Negative Energy. Any creature that falls 
into it drops for 400 feet before crossing over into the Plane 
of Negative Energy. Once there, it has no means of return.
     Necromancy spel ls cast w ithin or over the Dark Abyss are 
function as i f a f fected by the Heighten Spel l (t wo levels) and 
Empower Spell feats, but cure spells and other spells that use 
positive energy automatically fail.
 Creatures: Creatures for three separate encounters are 
provided below. Choose a set that corresponds to the average 
level of the party.
 Party Level 13th: One marut (MM 159), two dread wraiths 
(MM  258),  and  four  human  vampire  5th-level  fighters  
(MM 250).
 Party Level 14th: As the Party Level 13th version, plus a 
half-elf vampire monk 9/shadowdancer 4 (MM 251). If you 
wish, this vampire could be Sashess, once the companion of 
Tanneth Silverwright.
 Party Level 15th: Tw o  m a r u t s  (MM 159) plus the vampire 
described in the Party Level 14th version.
 Tactics: Regardless of which Encounter Level applies, the 
tactics for the marut (or maruts) remain the same. The marut 
periodically activates its air walk and true seeing abilities, and 
it has already done so when the PCs arrive. With true seeing, it 
should be able to spot the PCs, and with air walk, it can fi  ght  
opponents who take to the air.
Knowledge (religion) 
DC     Result
20 Certain places of power allow those with mettle to 
change themselves in strange and wondrous ways. 
Rumor holds that in some such places, a person 
can ignore the plans of the gods and even change 
his race.
25  Because the Necrotic Cradle is a place where life 
and death meet and mix, great changes can be 
wrought there. A fallen paladin of Heironeous who 
became a vampire once went to the Necrotic Cradle 
with several companions seeking to restore himself 
to life.
30 The paladin succeeded in his quest, but afterward, 
he appeared at the Sliver House of Justice—the 
temple where he had been trained—and sought 
absolution for some crime.
     The Necrotic Cradle is located beneath the 
dead city of Drathmere (or under Tomb Tor in the 
Deathlands, or any other place you care to put it).
35 The former vampire was refused atonement because 
he would not return to the Necrotic Cradle and 
fight his old companions, who had refused rebirth 
after he had turned them into vampires. One of 
these vampires, a half-elf monk named Sashess, is 
rumored to haunt the lands around the Necrotic 
Cradle still.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   204620_95374_Ch8.indd   2042/8/06   4:25:42 PM2/8/06   4:25:42 PM

205
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
    When the marut spots the PCs, it sets up 
a wall of force along the edge of the abyss to 
block  access  to  the  Necrotic  Cradle,  then  
delivers its only warning: “This place is for-
bidden. Leave now or be destroyed.” If the 
PCs don’t immediately leave, the marut uses 
greater  command  and orders them to fl  ee.  
Those who remain or in any way persist in 
their efforts to reach the Necrotic Cradle 
must face the marut’s greater dispel magic, 
chain lightning, and circle of death abilities, as 
well as its potent melee attacks. The marut 
also takes advantage of any opportunities 
to bull rush PCs into either the Dark Abyss 
behind it or the Brilliant Abyss within the 
Necrotic Cradle. If the marut believes it is 
losing the battle, it uses its earthquake abil-
ity in hopes of bringing the ceiling down 
on the PCs (and itself ).
    The vampires and dread wraiths are all 
that remain of Tanneth Silverwright’s com-
panions.  They  wish  to  enter  the  Necrotic  
Cradle to transform themselves into liches 
so that they need not fear sunlight, but 
they haven’t yet been able to get past the 
guardian. They arrive 1d4 rounds into the 
PCs’ combat with the marut (or maruts). 
Hoping that the PCs can distract the marut 
long enough to allow them entrance, they 
fl  y across the Dark Abyss during the battle. 
If the PCs appear to have the upper hand, 
the vampires and dread wraiths stop long 
enough to attack them until it looks like 
the marut has a fighting chance before 
proceeding on to the Necrotic Cradle.
The Necrotic Cradle
Read  or  paraphrase  the  following  when  a  PC  enters  the  
Necrotic Cradle.
The interior of the bulbous protrusion is a largely spherical space 
with  a  huge  rent  in  the  fl  oor  that  echoes  the  black  abyss  outside.  
This hole, however, is so fi lled with radiant light that it’s diffi cult 
to look at. Shining white cracks in the stone extend away from the 
hole, just as night-dark cracks extend from the entrance. Where 
these cracks meet, they fragment into smaller crevices of light and 
darkness that swirl around one another in ever-tightening spirals 
but never actually meet. The largest of these formations lies in the 
center of the bowllike fl  oor. Fully 15 feet across, this spiral pulsat es 
with crackling white and black energy. In its center, the two types 
of cracks actually meet, and the two forces win and lose a thousand 
battles with each second that passes.
The light in the Necrotic Cradle causes all creatures inside 
to become dazzled (no save). Because of all the cracks in the 
interior, the entire f loor is considered diffi  cult terrain, and 
the Climb DC for the walls is 12. In addition, any living 
or undead creature touching the walls or fl oor inside the 
cradle must make a DC 20 Will save. Success indicates that the 
creat ure is str uck by energ y (positive energ y i f t he c reat u re  
is living, or negative energy if it is undead) that heals it of 
2d8 points of damage. Failure indicates that the creature is 
struck by the opposite energy type and takes 2d8 points of 
damage.  The  only  area  that  is  safe  from  this  effect  is  the  
central spiral of cracks.
Brilliant Abyss
The Brilliant Abyss is a planar rupture that leads to the Plane 
of Positive Energy. Any creature that falls into it drops for 200 
feet before crossing over into the Plane of Positive Energy. 
Once there, it has no means of return.
     Transmutation spells cast within or over the Brilliant Abyss 
function as i f a f fected by the Heighten Spel l (t wo levels) and 
Empower Spell feats, and cure spells and other spells that use 
positive energy are maximized.
Central Spiral
Any creature standing in the largest spiral of cracks can 
rebuild itself. Each round that it remains in contact with 
The dark energies of the Necrotic Cradle can reshape life itself
Illus. by M. Komarck
620_95374_Ch8.indd   205620_95374_Ch8.indd   2052/8/06   4:25:49 PM2/8/06   4:25:49 PM

206
CHAPTER 8
REBUILDING YOUR 
CHARACTER
the spiral, the creature takes 10 points of damage from 
whichever type of energy (positive or negative) damages 
it. Any creature killed by this damage is torn apart by the 
warring energies and sucked—equipment and all—into 
the cracks of the spiral. Then the rebuilt creature comes 
into existence in the same place, with full hit points and 
all the equipment the previous creature possessed when it 
was destroyed. If the creature is killed by some means other 
than positive or negative energ y whi le in contact w ith the 
central spiral, it dies and does not get the opportunity to 
rebuild. A creature that is not damaged by either negative 
energy or positive energy cannot use the Necrotic Cradle 
to rebuild.
Returning to the Necrotic Cradle
If the PCs want to return to the Necrotic Cradle for another 
rebuild, you have many options. More maruts or other inevi-
tables might be g uarding it. A lter natively, some new creat ures, 
such as power ful undead or outsiders, might also have moved 
in to possess the site.
     If you don’t want the PCs to use the same rebuild location 
a second time, you could rule that the Necrotic Cradle works 
only once for any given creature. Or perhaps some creatures 
tried to repair the rifts in the plane and nullifi  ed the reforming 
proper ties of the Necrotic Cradle in the process. A lter natively, 
one of the two abysses might have won the energy battle, clos-
ing one side and opening a two-way gate to an energy plane.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
OTHER REBUILD QUEST 
OBJECTIVES
Here are some other ideas for places the PCs might go to rebuild 
and the kinds of creatures they might encounter there.
Bastion of Unborn Souls: Somewhere on the Plane of Positive 
Energy floats this place of powerful magic from which all souls 
come and to which gods fear to go. Strange beings made of 
energy and soulstuff guard it from those who would abuse its 
power. This location is fully described in the Bastion of Broken 
Souls adventure.
    Forge of Remaking: In this strange place, a character must 
confront himself and defeat his fears or die trying. By doing so, 
he can change his truename and thus change his being. This 
location is fully detailed in Tome of Magic.
Morpheus the Changer: The titan Morpheus has strange 
powers to reshape others through their dreams. Those who wish 
his aid must defeat the titan in single combat, because he uses 
this ability only on those who can best him.
Seldarine Pool: The magic waters of the Seldarine Pool are in 
a hidden shrine to the elf gods. Legend holds that washing in 
the waters of the Seldarine Pool can heal wounds and cure ills, 
but that drinking from it grants the imbiber the power to alter 
his being. A tribe of wild elves fiercely guards the pool, killing all 
who come to it—even other elves.
Shattershear Cliffs: The winds that rip at someone falling from 
the Shattershear Cliffs can actually tear a body to pieces and 
put it back together. Anyone who can make it there, win her way 
past the guardian beast, leap from the roc’s nest, and somehow 
survive the fall, can remake herself.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   206620_95374_Ch8.indd   2062/8/06   4:25:57 PM2/8/06   4:25:57 PM

APPENDIX
Appendix: Quick PC 
and NPC Creation
This section presents quick and easy ways to create characters 
for both players and DMs. If you’re a fast study and need a 
relatively low-level character, you can create one in 5 minutes 
with the system presented here.
     For ready-to-play 1st-level characters, consult the starting 
packages presented in Chapters 1 and 2.
     Creating a character always involves making certain deci-
sions. Below are the ordered steps to create a character in an 
effi  cient  manner.
1. CHOOSE A CLASS
Character class determines the types of feats you need to 
select, the magic items your character needs, and many other 
factors. So the fi  rst decision you need to make is what kind 
of character you want to create.
2. DETERMINE 
ABILIT Y SCORES
To speed up the process, use the elite ability score array from 
the Dungeon Master’s Guide. You can either use the suggested 
ability arrangement for your chosen class or assign the scores 
as you wish. The elite array gives you scores of 15, 14, 13, 12, 
10, and 8 to distribute as you wish.
    Barbarian:    Strength 15, Dexterity 13, Constitution 14, 
Intelligence 10, Wisdom 12, Charisma 8.
    Bard:    Strength  10,  Dexterity  14,  Constitution  13,  Intel-
ligence 12, Wisdom 8, Charisma 15.
 Beguiler: Strength 8, Dexterity 14, Constitution 12, Intel-
ligence 15, Wisdom 10, Charisma 13.
     Cleric:     Strength  12,  Dexterity  8,  Constitution  13,  Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 15, Charisma 14.
 Dragon Shaman: Strength 15, Dexterity 12, Constitution 
14, Intelligence 8, Wisdom 10, Charisma 13.
    Druid:    Strength 10, Dexterity 12, Constitution 14, Intel-
ligence 8, Wisdom 15, Charisma 13.
 Duskblade: Strength 15, Dexterity 13, Constitution 12, 
Intelligence 14, Wisdom 10, Charisma 8.
 Favored Soul: Strength 14, Dexterity 10, Constitution 12, 
Intelligence 8, Wisdom 15, Charisma 13.
     Fighter:     Strength 15, Dexterity 13, Constitution 14, Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 12, Charisma 8.
 Hexblade: Strength 15, Dexterity 13, Constitution 12, 
Intelligence 10, Wisdom 8, Charisma 14.
 Knight: Strength 15, Dexterity 12, Constitution 13, Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 8, Charisma 14.
 Marshal:  Strength  14,  Dexterity  13,  Constitution  12,  
Intelligence 10, Wisdom 8, Charisma 15.
     Monk:     Strength 13, Dexterity 15, Constitution 12, Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 14, Charisma 8.
     Paladin:     Strength 13, Dexterity 8, Constitution 14, Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 12, Charisma 15.
    Ranger:    Strength 12, Dexterity 15, Constitution 14, Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 12, Charisma 8.
    Rogue:    Strength 13, Dexterity 15, Constitution 12, Intel-
ligence 14, Wisdom 10, Charisma 8.
 Scout: Strength 14, Dexterity 15, Constitution 12, Intel-
ligence 10, Wisdom 13, Charisma 8.
    Sorcerer:    Streng th 8, Dex ter it y 13, Constit ution 14, Intel-
ligence 12, Wisdom 10, Charisma 15.
 Swashbuckler: Strength 13, Dexterity 15, Constitution 
10, Intelligence 14, Wisdom 8, Charisma 12.
 Wa rl o c k : Strength 8, Dexterity 14, Constitution 13, Intel-
ligence 12, Wisdom 10, Charisma 15.
 Wa r m a ge :  Strength 8, Dexterity 13, Constitution 12, 
Intelligence 14, Wisdom 10, Charisma 15.
    Wizard: Strength 8, Dexterity 13, Constitution 14, Intel-
ligence 15, Wisdom 12, Charisma 10.
    If you are creating a character above 1st level, you might 
also have attribute bonuses to spend. Your character gains a 
1-point bonus at 4th, 8th, 12th, 16th, and 20th level. Be sure 
to spend these points before moving on to the next step, 
if applicable.
3. PICK YOUR RACE
Li ke class, race is pr imar i ly a mat ter of taste or need. If you 
lack any real preference, choose the race that best matches 
your chosen character class from Table A–1: Preferred Races 
by Class. Some entries also mention a second race taken 
from another supplement; those races in italics have a level 
adjustment of +1 or higher and thus can’t be used as 1st-
level characters.
Table A–1: Preferred Races by Class
Class                                  Race
Barbarian                          Half-orc                          (or                          goliath
1
)
Bard                                   Gnome
Beguiler Half-elf (or changeling
2
)
Cleric                                 Human
Dragon shaman Human (or dragonborn human
3
)
Druid                                 Elf                                 (or                                 killoren
4
)
Duskblade                         Elf
Favored soul Human
Fighter                               Dwarf                               (or                               warforged
2
)
Hexblade                           Human
Knight                                Human
Marshal                             Human
Monk                                 Human                                 (or                                 buomman
5
)
Paladin                              Human                              (or                              aasimar)
Ranger                               Elf                               (or                               shifter
2
)
Rogue                                Halfl ing (or whisper gnome
1
)
Scout                                 Elf                                 (or                                 raptoran
4
)
Sorcerer                             Human                             (or                             spellscale
3
)
Swashbuckler                    Human                    (or tiefling)
Warlock                             Human
Warmage                           Human
Wizard                               Elf                               (or                               illumian
6
)
1 Races of Stone
2 Races of Eberron
3 Races of the Dragon
4 Races of the Wild
5 Planar Handbook
6 Races of Destiny
207
620_95374_Ch8.indd   207620_95374_Ch8.indd   2072/8/06   4:26:07 PM2/8/06   4:26:07 PM

208
APPENDIX
4. PICK YOUR SKILLS
Find your character class on Table A–2: Number of Skills by 
Class to determine how many skills your character can have.
Table A–2: Number of Skills by Class
Class Base Number of Skills
Barbarian 4 + Int mod
Bard 6 + Int mod
Beguiler 6 + Int mod
Cleric 2 + Int mod
Dragon shaman 2 + Int mod
Druid 4 + Int mod
Duskblade 2 + Int mod
Favored soul 2 + Int mod
Fighter 2 + Int mod
Hexblade 2 + Int mod
Knight 2 + Int mod
Marshal 4 + Int mod
Monk 4 + Int mod
Paladin 2 + Int mod
Ranger 6 + Int mod
Rogue 8 + Int mod
Scout 8 + Int mod
Sorcerer 2 + Int mod
Swashbuckler 4 + Int mod
Warlock 2 + Int mod
Warmage 2 + Int mod
Wizard 2 + Int mod
SKILL PRIORITY LISTS
Each of the entries below is a list of skills, rated in order from 
most important to least important for a typical member of 
the class. Start at the beginning of your class’s skill list and 
count off the number of skills your character is entitled 
to based on the information in Table A–2. The character 
gains each of those skills at the maximum ranks allowed 
for his level. A human character gains one bonus skill at 
maximum ranks.
     For  example,  if  you’re  playing  a  half-orc  barbarian  with  
an Intelligence score of 8, you are entitled to 4 – 1 = 3 skills. 
Take the fi rst three skills from the barbarian list (Survival, 
Listen, and Jump), and spend the maximum ranks allowed 
for each (character level + 3).
     Barbarian: Survival (Wis), Listen (Wis), Jump (Str), Climb 
(Str), Swim (Str), Handle Animal (Cha), Ride (Dex).
    Bard:    Perform (Cha), Concentration (Con), Use Magic 
Device (Cha), Bluff (Cha), Diplomacy (Cha), Gather Infor-
mation (Cha), Intimidate (Cha), Spellcraft (Int), Knowledge 
(local) (Int), Decipher Script (Int).
 Beguiler: Hide (Dex), Move Silently (Dex), Spot (Wis), 
Search (Int), Disable Device (Int), Open Lock (Int), Concen-
tration (Con), Bluff (Cha), Listen (Wis), Tumble (Dex).
    Cleric:    Concentration (Con), Heal (Wis), Knowledge 
(religion) (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Spellcraft (Int), Knowledge 
(the planes) (Int).
 Dragon Shaman: Three ski l ls from totem dragon choice 
(see  class),  Climb  (Str),  Intimidate  (Cha),  Knowledge  
(nature) (Int).
    Druid:    Survival (Wis), Handle Animal (Cha), Spot (Wis), 
Listen (Wis), Knowledge (nature) (Int), Spellcraft (Int), Ride 
(Dex), Swim (Str).
 Duskblade: Concentration (Con), Jump (Str), Spellcraft 
(Int),  Climb  (Str),  Knowledge  (arcana)  (Int),  Decipher  
Script (Int).
 Favored Soul: Concentration (Con), Heal (Wis), Diplo-
macy (Cha), Sense Motive (Wis), Spellcraft (Int), Knowledge 
(arcana) (Int).
     Fighter:     Climb (Str), Jump (Str), Intimidate (Cha), Swim 
(Str), Ride (Dex), Handle Animal (Cha).
 Hexblade: Concentration  (Con),  Intimidate  (Cha),  
Bluff  (Cha),  Spellcraft  (Int),  Knowledge  (arcana)  (Int),  
Ride (Dex).
 Knight: Intimidate (Cha), Ride (Dex), Handle Animal 
(Cha), Knowledge (nobility and royalty (Int), Jump (Str), 
Climb (Str).
 Marshal: Diplomacy (Cha), Spot (Wis), Listen (Wis), 
Intimidate (Cha), Sense Motive (Wis), Knowledge (history) 
(Int), Swim (Str), Ride (Dex).
    Monk:    Tumble (Dex), Spot (Wis), Move Silently (Dex), 
Hide (Dex), Escape Artist (Dex), Climb (Str), Jump (Str), 
Balance (Dex).
    Paladin:    Diplomacy (Cha), Ride (Dex), Sense Motive 
(Wis), Heal (Wis), Concentration (Con), Knowledge (reli-
gion) (Int).
    Ranger:    Survival  (Wis),  Hide  (Dex),  Listen  (Wis),  
Spot (Wis), Handle Animal (Cha), Move Silently (Dex), 
Knowledge  (geography)  (Int),  Search  (Int),  Jump  (Str),  
Swim (Str).
     Rogue:     Hide (Dex), Move Si lently (Dex), Search (Int), Dis-
able Device (Int), Open Locks (Dex), Sleight of Hand (Dex), 
Tumble (Dex), Spot (Wis), Listen (Wis), Bluff (Cha), Climb 
(Str), Escape Artist (Dex).
 Scout: Hide (Dex), Move Si lently (Dex), Spot (Wis), Search 
(Int), Disable Device (Int), Listen (Wis), Tumble (Dex), Survival 
(Wis), Climb (Str), Jump (Str), Knowledge (dungeoneering) 
(Int), Balance (Dex).
    Sorcerer:    Concentration (Con), Bluff (Cha), Knowledge 
(arcana) (Int), Spellcraft (Int), Craft (Int), Profession (Wis).
 Swashbuckler: Tumble (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Jump (Str), 
Diplomacy (Cha), Balance (Dex), Escape Artist (Dex), Swim 
(Str), Sense Motive (Wis).
 Wa rl o c k : Concentration (Con), Use Magic Device (Cha), 
Bluff (Cha), Spellcraft (Int), Intimidate (Cha), Knowledge 
(arcana) (Int).
 Wa r m a ge : Concentration (Con), Spellcraft (Int), Intimi-
date (Cha), Knowledge (arcana) (Int), Knowledge (history) 
(Int), Craft (Int).
    Wizard:    Concentration (Con), Spellcraft (Int), Decipher 
Script (Int), Knowledge (arcana) (Int), Knowledge (the planes) 
(Int), Knowledge (dungeoneering) (Int).
5. PICK YOUR FEATS
In many ways, your character’s feats defi  ne his basic abilities 
and talents. The following feat progressions map out appro-
priate selections from 1st to 20th level. The “H” entry in the 
tables represents a human’s bonus feat, and the numbers 
represent the levels at which a character of that type would 
gain a feat in question. 
620_95374_Ch8.indd   208620_95374_Ch8.indd   2082/8/06   4:26:14 PM2/8/06   4:26:14 PM

209
APPENDIX
     To use this table, fi  nd the number of feats your character is 
entitled to, then start at the beginning of the chosen progres-
sion and take that number of feats. If your character is not 
human, you can still start with the feat labeled “H,” but this 
often isn’t necessary.
     For example, a 7th-level half-orc barbarian has three feats. 
If you’re using the destroyer progression, you would need to 
take the “H” feat, Power Attack, since that feat is a prerequisite 
for Cleave.
    Some of the progressions require certain ability scores 
to  meet  their  prerequisites.  After  you  choose  the  feat  
progression you want, check the prerequisites and be sure 
to fulfi  l l them, even i f you have to go back and change your 
character’s attributes to match the requirements. In some 
cases, you must also buy ranks in certain skills to qualify 
for a particular feat progression. In this case, make sure 
you  purchased  the  relevant  skills  when  you  spent  your  
character’s skill ranks in step 4 (or go back and change your 
skill choices).
    Most of the feats in these progressions are found in the 
Player’s Handbook or in this book (those marked with an 
asterisk). Any class appearing in a book other than the Player’s 
Handbook might mention some feats from another book 
(usually the supplement in which the class appeared).
Table A–3: Feat Progressions by Party Role
Barbarian
                Destroyer                Hunter                Whirlwind
H Power Attack Track Two-Weapon Fighting
1st Cleave Weapon Focus (any two-handed) Weapon Focus (kukri)
3rd Mad Foam Rager* Trophy Collector* Skill Focus (Tumble)
6th Weapon Focus (greataxe) Combat Focus* Two-Weapon Pounce*
9th Improved Critical (greataxe) Blind-Fight Improved Critical (kukri)
12th Improved Sunder Combat Vigor* Improved Two-Weapon Fighting
15th Defensive Sweep* Combat Awareness* Two-Weapon Rend*
18th Overwhelming Assault* Flay* Greater Two-Weapon Fighting
Bard
 Controller                                                     Problem                                                     Solver                                                     Vanguard
H Skill Focus (Perform) Skill Focus (Use Magic Device) Still Spell
1st Negotiator Arcane Flourish* Combat Expertise
3rd Wanderer’s Diplomacy* Magical Aptitude Exotic Weapon Proficiency
       (spiked chain)
6th Combat Panache* Battle Dancer* Improved Trip
9th Master Manipulator* Arcane Accompaniment* Improved Disarm
12th Spell Focus (enchantment) Improved Initiative Combat Refl exes
15th Improved Feint Combat Reflexes Weapon Focus (spiked chain)
18th Fade into Violence* Vexing Flanker* Power Attack
Beguiler
                Controller                Investigator                Trickster
H Spell Focus (enchantment) Spell Focus (enchantment) Spell Focus (illusion)
1st Improved Initiative Stealthy Combat Expertise
3rd Greater Spell Focus (enchantment) Wanderer’s Diplomacy* Improved Feint
5th† Silent Spell Silent Spell Silent Spell
6th Arcane Thesis* Quick Draw Fade into Violence*
9th Spell Penetration Eschew Materials Acrobatic Strike*
10th† Still Spell Still Spell Still Spell
12th Heighten Spell Weapon Finesse Shadow Striker*
15th Scribe Scroll Spell Penetration Spell Penetration
18th Greater Spell Penetration Greater Spell Focus (enchantment) Greater Spell Focus (illusion)
Cleric
                Defender                Destroyer                Healer
H Extra Turning Extra Turning Combat Casting
1st Improved Turning Divine Justice* Sacred Healing*
3rd Iron Will Weapon Focus (any) Divine Ward*
6th Spell Focus (evocation) Divine Armor* Extra Turning
9th Sacred Radiance* Smiting Spell* Brew Potion
12th Combat Casting Power Attack Sacred Purifi cation*
15th Tower Shield Proficiency Combat Casting Quicken Spell
18th Lunging Strike* Armor Specialization* (heavy) Extra Turning
620_95374_Ch8.indd   209620_95374_Ch8.indd   2092/8/06   4:26:21 PM2/8/06   4:26:21 PM

210
APPENDIX
Table A–3: Feat Progressions by Party Role (cont.)
Dragon Shaman
                Defender                Destroyer                Second-Rank                Warrior
H Armor Proficiency (heavy) Power Attack Combat Reflexes
1st Shield Specialization* (heavy) Cleave Power Attack
2nd† Skill Focus Skill Focus Skill Focus
3rd Shield Ward* Weapon Focus (morningstar) Weapon Focus (longspear)
6th Active Shield Defense* Ability Focus
1
 (breath weapon) Hindering Opportunist*
8th† Skill Focus Skill Focus Skill Focus
9th Improved Natural Armor
1
 Brutal Strike* Short Haft*
12th Weapon Focus (morningstar) Improved Critical (morningstar) Lunging Strike*
15th Blind-Fight Improved Sunder Stalwart Defense*
16th† Skill Focus Skill Focus Skill Focus
18th Armor Specialization* (heavy) Shield Specialization* (heavy) Improved Critical (longspear)
† Bonus feat; see page 13 for options.
1 See Monster Manual, page 303.
Druid
                Beastmaster                Feral                Beast                Warden
H Animal Affinity Combat Casting Spell Focus (conjuration)
1st Companion Spellbond* Alertness Augment Summoning
3rd Combat Casting Keen-Eared Scout* Shield Specialization* (heavy)
6th           Combat           Refl exes Natural Spell Extend Spell
9th Empower Spell Improved Natural Attack (any)
1
            Imbued            Summoning*
12th Quicken Spell Power Attack Shield Ward*
15th         Vexing         Flanker*         Flay*         Spell         Penetration
18th Extend Spell Improved Bull Rush Armor Specialization* (medium)
1 See Monster Manual, page 304.
Duskblade
                Blaster                Defender                Skirmisher
H Weapon Focus (ranged spell) Toughness Weapon Focus (any one-handed)
1st Point Blank Shot Combat Expertise Dodge
2nd† Combat Casting Combat Casting Combat Casting
3rd Precise Shot Arcane Toughness* Mobility
6th Empower Spell Shield Specialization* (heavy) Spring Attack
9th Improved Critical (ranged spell) Shield Ward* Improved Critical (any one-handed)
12th Improved Precise Shot Armor Specialization* (medium) Combat Tactician*
15th Spell Penetration Craft Magic Arms and Armor Combat Expertise
18th Greater Spell Penetration Weapon Focus (longsword) Whirlwind Attack
† Bonus feat.
Favored Soul
                Defender                Healer                Vanguard
H Armor Proficiency (heavy) Spontaneous Healer
1
                             Combat                             Focus*
1st Shield Specialization* (heavy) Augment Healing
1
                                  Combat                                  Casting
3rd Weapon Focus† Weapon Focus† Weapon Focus†
3rd Shield Ward* Combat Casting Power Attack
6th Combat Focus* Brew Potion Cleave
9th Active Shield Defense* Craft Wand Craft Magic Arms and Armor
12th Weapon Specialization† Weapon Specialization† Weapon Specialization†
12th Combat Vigor* Scribe Scroll Combat Vigor*
15th         Blind-Fight         Reach         Spell
1
 Improved Critical (deity’s
       favored weapon)
18th Combat Awareness* Flyby Attack Armor Specialization*
† Bonus feat; applies to deity’s favored weapon.
1 See Complete Divine.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   210620_95374_Ch8.indd   2102/8/06   4:26:27 PM2/8/06   4:26:27 PM

211
APPENDIX
Table A–3: Feat Progressions by Party Role (cont.)
Fighter
                Archer                Defender                Destroyer
H Point Blank Shot Blind-Fight Power Attack
1st Precise Shot Iron Will Cleave
1st† Weapon Focus (longbow) Weapon Focus (longsword) Weapon Focus (greatsword)
2nd† Rapid Shot Shield Specialization* (heavy) Flay*
3rd Dodge Combat Reflexes Improved Sunder
4th† Weapon Specialization (longbow) Weapon Specialization (longsword)    Weapon Specialization
       (greatsword)
6th           Mobility           Shield           Ward*           Iron           Will
6th† Shot on the Run Combat Expertise Improved Bull Rush
8th† Greater Weapon Focus (longbow) Greater Weapon Focus (longsword)    Greater Weapon Focus 
       (greatsword)
9th Ranged Weapon Mastery* (piercing) Melee Weapon Mastery* (slashing)     Melee Weapon Mastery* (slashing)
10th† Manyshot Improved Disarm Improved Critical (greatsword)
12th Armor Specialization* (medium) Armor Specialization* (heavy) Armor Specialization* (heavy)
12th† Greater Weapon Specialization Greater Weapon Specialization Greater Weapon Specialization
     (longbow)     (longsword)     (greatsword)
14th† Improved Precise Shot Vexing Flanker* Slashing Flurry*
15th Improved Critical (longbow) Defensive Sweep* Overwhelming Assault*
16th† Improved Initiative Power Attack Intimidating Strike
18th† Quick Draw Improved Initiative Improved Initiative
18th Weapon Supremacy* (longbow) Weapon Supremacy* (longsword) Weapon Supremacy* (greatsword)
20th† Penetrating Shot* Robilar’s Gambit* Cometary Collision*
† Bonus feat.
Hexblade
                Defender                Destroyer                Skirmisher
H             Ability             Focus
1
 (hexblade’s curse) Power Attack Ability Focus
1
 (hexblade’s curse)
1st           Armor           Profi           ciency           (medium)           Cleave           Dodge
3rd           Battle           Caster
2
 Weapon Focus (any two-handed) Mobility
5th† Spell Focus (necromancy) Combat Casting Spell Focus (enchantment)
6th Combat Casting Power Critical Spring Attack
9th          Practiced          Spellcaster
2
 Improved Critical (any two-handed Dash
3
      weapon)
10th† Greater Spell Focus (necromancy) Spell Focus (necromancy) Greater Spell Focus (enchantment)
12th Armor Specialization (medium) Power Critical
3
                                        Bounding                                        Assault*
15th         Ex tra         Slot
2
 (3rd) Improved Toughness
3
                            Elusive                            Target
3
15th† Spell Penetration Greater Spell Focus (necromancy) Spell Penetration
18th         Extra         Spell
2
 (3rd) Defensive Sweep* Rapid Blitz*
20th† Greater Spell Penetration Spell Penetration Greater Spell Penetration
†Bonus feat.
1 See Monster Manual, page 303.
2 See Complete Arcane.
3 See Complete Warrior.
Knight
                Cavalier                Defender                Destroyer
H Skill Focus (Ride) Shield Specialization* (heavy) Power Attack
1st Mounted Combat Weapon Focus (any one-handed) Cleave
2nd† Weapon Focus (lance) Mounted Combat Mounted Combat
3rd Shield Specialization* (heavy) Shield Ward* Improved Bull Rush
5th†        Ride-By        Attack        Endurance        Endurance
6th Short Haft* Ability Focus
1
 (test of mettle) Weapon Focus (any one-handed)
9th Improved Critical (lance) Improved Critical (any one-handed Cometary Collision*
      weapon)
10th†      Spirited      Charge      Diehard      Diehard
12th Armor Specialization* (heavy) Armor Specialization* (heavy) Ability Focus
1
 (daunting challenge)
15th† Trample Iron Will Great Fortitude
15th Power Attack Indomitable Soul* Steadfast Determination* 
18th Lunging Strike* Defensive Sweep* Armor Specialization* (heavy)
† Bonus feat.
1 See Monster Manual, page 303.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   211620_95374_Ch8.indd   2112/8/06   4:26:34 PM2/8/06   4:26:34 PM

212
APPENDIX
Table A–3: Feat Progressions by Party Role (cont.)
Marshal
                Defender                Second-Rank                Warrior                Vanguard
H Shield Specialization* (heavy) Combat Reflexes Improved Initiative
1st Shield Ward* Deft Opportunist
1
                                  Battlefi                                  eld                                  Inspiration
1
1st
2
 Skill Focus (Diplomacy) Skill Focus (Diplomacy) Skill Focus (Diplomacy)
3rd Armor Profi ciency (heavy) Weapon Focus (reach weapon) Weapon Focus (any)
6th          Goad
1
                                                           Hindering                                                           Opportunist*                                                           Intimidating                                                           Strike*
9th          Shieldmate
1
                                                  Short                                                  Haft*                                                  Endurance
12th         Blind-Fight         Distracting         Attack
1
                                 Diehard
15th Combat Expertise Stalwart Defense* Daunting Presence
1
18th Armor Specialization* (heavy) Lunging Strike* Overwhelming Assault*
1 From Miniatures Handbook.
2 Bonus feat.
Monk
                Defender                Destroyer                Skirmisher
H Combat Focus* Improved Natural Attack Improved Initiative
1st† Stunning Fist Improved Grapple Stunning Fist
1st Dodge Weapon Focus (unarmed strike) Ability Focus
1
 (stunning fist)
2nd†       Defl ect Arrows Combat Refl exes Defl ect Arrows
3rd Versatile Unarmed Strike* Power Attack Dodge
6th† Improved Trip Improved Trip Improved Disarm
6th Leap of the Heavens* Improved Bull Rush Mobility
9th Combat Defense* Improved Overrun Spring Attack
12th Combat Vigor* Cleave Weapon Focus (unarmed strike)
15th Fiery Fist* Improved Sunder Blind-Fight
18th Fiery Ki Defense* Great Cleave Improved Critical (unarmed strike)
1 See Monster Manual, page 303.
† Bonus feat.
Paladin
                Cavalier                Destroyer                Vanguard
H Mounted Combat Power Attack Improved Initiative
1st Ride-By Attack Weapon Focus (any two-handed) Shield Specialization* (heavy)
3rd Mounted Archery Extra Turning Combat Focus*
6th Spirited Charge Divine Justice* Ritual Blessing*
9th Trample Improved Critical (any two-handed Combat Vigor*
      weapon)
12th Power Attack Divine Armor* Sacred Purifi cation*
15th Improved Critical (lance) Improved Sunder Sacred Radiance*
18th Shield Specialization* (heavy) Divine Fortune* Shield Ward*
Ranger
                Archer                Hunter                Skirmisher
H Point Blank Shot Blind-Fight Dodge
1st           Precise           Shot           Alertness           Mobility
1st †         Track         Track         Track
2nd† Rapid Shot Rapid Shot or Two-Weapon Fighting    Two-Weapon Fighting
3rd Weapon Focus (longbow) Keen-Eared Scout* Combat Reflexes
6th Dodge Combat Focus* Spring Attack
9th Mobility Combat Vigor* Shadow Striker*
12th Improved Initiative Combat Awareness* Two-Weapon Pounce*
15th Shot on the Run Weapon Focus (longbow) Two-Weapon Rend*
18th Far Shot Combat Strike* Improved Critical (short sword)
† Bonus feat.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   212620_95374_Ch8.indd   2122/8/06   4:26:40 PM2/8/06   4:26:40 PM

213
APPENDIX
Table A–3: Feat Progressions by Party Role (cont.)
Rogue
                Archer                Duelist                Explorer
H Point Blank Shot Combat Expertise Alertness
1st Precise Shot Improved Feint Combat Refl exes
3rd           Rapid           Reload           Weapon           Finesse           Vexing           Flanker*
6th           Deadeye           Shot*           Tumbling           Feint*           Adaptable           Flanker*
9th Rapid Shot Improved Initiative Acrobatic Strike*
12th Crossbow Sniper* Einhander* Shadow Striker*
15th Weapon Focus (light crossbow) Dodge Keen-Eared Scout*
18th Improved Precise Shot Combat Cloak Expert* Spectral Skirmisher*
Scout
                Archer                Hunter                Skirmisher
H Point Blank Shot Track Dodge
1st Precise Shot Alertness Two-Weapon Fighting
3rd Weapon Focus (shortbow) Keen-Eared Scout* Weapon Focus (short sword)
4th† Dodge Skill Focus (Survival) Mobility
6th Mobility Point Blank Shot Two-Weapon Defense
8th† Shot on the Run Brachiation
1
                                            Spring                                            Attack
9th Improved Initiative Precise Shot Two-Weapon Pounce*
12th† Quick Draw Improved Initiative Quick Draw
12th Improved Critical (shortbow) Weapon Focus (shortbow) Improved Two-Weapon Fighting
15th Telling Blow* Deadeye Shot* Dual Strike
1
16th†      Danger      Sense
1
                                             Blind-Fight                                              Blind-Fight
18th Improved Precise Shot Improved Critical (shortbow) Telling Blow*
20th†      Quick      Reconnoiter
1
 Danger Sense Improved Initiative 
† Bonus feat.
1 See Complete Adventurer.
Sorcerer
 Battle Mage Blaster Infernal Summoner
H Toughness Lightning Reflexes Infernal Sorcerer Heritage*
1st Bonded Familiar* Spell Focus (evocation) Infernal Sorcerer Howl*
3rd Improved Counterspell Greater Spell Focus (evocation) Spell Focus (conjuration)
6th Arcane Toughness* Spell Penetration Augment Summoning
9th Spell-Linked Familiar* Blistering Spell* Imbued Summoning*
12th Dampen Spell* Greater Spell Penetration Infernal Sorcerer Eyes*
15th Combat Familiar* Empower Spell Infernal Sorcerer Resistance*
18th Lurking Familiar* Widen Spell Extend Spell
Swashbuckler
                Destroyer                Duelist                Skirmisher
H Weapon Focus (short sword) Weapon Focus (rapier) Dodge
1st† Weapon Finesse Weapon Finesse Weapon Finesse
1st Two-Weapon Fighting Combat Expertise Mobility
3rd Two-Weapon Defense Improved Feint Dash
1
6th Improved Two-Weapon Fighting Dodge Spring Attack
9th Two-Weapon Pounce* Melee Evasion* Combat Acrobat*
12th Improved Two-Weapon Defense
1
               Improved               Disarm               Bounding               Assault*
15th Greater Two-Weapon Fighting Tumbling Feint* Combat Tactician*
18th Two-Weapon Rend* Combat Cloak Expert* Rapid Blitz*
† Bonus feat.
1 See Complete Warrior.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   213620_95374_Ch8.indd   2132/8/06   4:26:46 PM2/8/06   4:26:46 PM

214
APPENDIX
6. MISCELLANEOUS 
CHARACTERISTICS
Select your character’s name, gender, age, height, weight, 
alignment, and personality. You can roll randomly for age, 
height, and weight, or just select the averages, as described 
in the Player’s Handbook (see Vital Statistics, page 109). If 
you don’t want to worry about which alignment to pick, 
make your character neutral good and she’ll get along with 
most people.
    If you have some ideas for your character’s personality, 
this is the time to solidify them and perhaps jot down a few 
notes.  You  might  determine  her  random  personality  traits  
by rolling on the tables on page 221.
     If you have trouble choosing a name, the Player’s Handbook 
offers  examples  for  each  race,  and  many  random  name  
generators exist online. You could also take the name of a 
character from a book or a movie and change a couple of 
letters or a syllable.
Table A–3: Feat Progressions by Party Role (cont.)
Warlock
 Blaster                                                          Controller                                                          Problem                                                          Solver
H Point Blank Shot Necropolis Born
1
 Skill Focus (Use Magic Device)
1st Precise Shot Intimidating Strike* Communicator
1
3rd Weapon Focus (ranged spell) Ability Focus
2
 (eldritch blast) Spell Hand
1
6th Point Blank Shot Sudden Extend
1
                                      Ranged                                      Spell                                      Specialization
1
9th Spell Penetration Precise Shot Extra Invocation
1
 (least)
12th Maximize Spell-Like Ability
1
                       Extra                       Invocation
1
 (lesser) Extra Invocation
1
 (lesser)
     (eldritch blast)
15th Quicken Spell-Like Ability
2
 Quicken Spell-Like Ability
2
                    Spell                    Penetration
     (eldritch blast)     (eldritch blast)
18th         Ability         Focus
2
 (eldritch blast) Extra Invocation
1
 (greater) Extra Invocation
1
 (greater)
1 See Complete Arcane.
2 See Monster Manual, page 303.
Warmage
                Battle                Mage                Blaster                Sharpshooter
H             Battle             Caster
1
 Lightning Reflexes Point Blank Shot
1st Toughness Spell Focus (evocation) Precise Shot
3rd Weapon Finesse Greater Spell Focus (evocation) Weapon Focus (ranged spell)
6th Arcane Toughness* Extra Edge
1
                                             Ranged                                             Spell                                             Specialization
1
7th†        Sudden        Empower
1
                                       Sudden                                       Empower
1
                                 Sudden                                 Empower
1
9th Armor Profi ciency (heavy) Spell Penetration Spell Penetration
10th†      Sudden      Enlarge
1
                                          Sudden                                          Enlarge
1
                                     Sudden                                     Enlarge
1
12th         E x tra         Edge
1
 Greater Spell Penetration Split Ray
1
15th†      Sudden      Widen
1
                                            Sudden                                            Widen
1
                                      Sudden                                      Widen
1
15th Lunging Strike* Arcane Mastery
1
                                     Extra                                     Slot
1
 (6th)
18th         Twin         Spell
1
                                                   Repeat                                                   Spell
1
 Improved Critical (ranged spell)
20th†      Sudden      Maximize
1
                                      Sudden                                      Maximize
1
                                 Sudden                                 Maximize
1
1 See Complete Arcane.
Wizard
                Blaster                Controller                Problem                Solver
H Combat Casting Spell Focus (enchantment) Combat Familiar*
1st† Scribe Scroll Scribe Scroll Scribe Scroll
1st Spell Focus (evocation) Greater Spell Focus (enchantment) Grenadier*
3rd Spell Penetration Spell Penetration Mad Alchemist*
5th† Craft Wand Heighten Spell Brew Potion
6th Arcane Toughness* Improved Counterspell Craft Wondrous Item
9th Precise Shot Dampen Spell* Spell-Linked Familiar*
10th† Empower Spell Silent Spell Craft Wand
12th Craft Staff Spell Penetration Eschew Materials
15th† Maximize Spell Craft Staff Extend Spell
15th Greater Spell Penetration Improved Initiative Elven Spell Lore*
18th Arcane Thesis* Greater Spell Penetration Spell Penetration
20th† Quicken Spell Quicken Spell Quicken Spell
† Bonus feat.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   214620_95374_Ch8.indd   2142/8/06   4:26:53 PM2/8/06   4:26:53 PM

215
APPENDIX
7. CHOOSE EQUIPMENT
Purchasing equipment can prove to be a long, involved 
task. To help you get started, this section presents sample 
equipment  sets  for  NPCs  from  1st  to  20th  level.  Each  set  
includes a basic weapon, armor, and other items appropri-
ate for a particular character class, complete with their gold 
piece values. If you need to create an NPC, you can simply 
take the indicated gear and spend the excess gold on scrolls, 
wands, potions, and other consumable items. If you want 
to tinker with the equipment on the list, you can easily 
swap out individual items for others based on their gold 
piece values.
    At most levels, PCs have much higher budgets for equip-
ment than NPCs do. So when you make a player character, 
use  the  NPC  equipment  lists  as  a  starting  point.  The  NPC  
package provides the basic necessities your character needs to 
function. From there, you can expand your character’s equip-
ment to fi  t his specifi  c needs, investing the excess money in 
better weapons or armor, or a variety of powerful, wondrous 
items. See Table A–5: PC Remaining Budget by Level to see 
how your PC’s wealth compares to the gear available to an 
NPC of your level.
     If  you  are  in  a  rush,  just  purchase  a  few  expensive  
items to supplement the NPC gear. For a fighter or simi-
lar character, buy a second weapon with the maximum 
enhancement bonus you can afford. Use it as your primary 
weapon if it is better than the one in the NPC package 
(perhaps  trading  in  the  weapon  from  the  NPC  package  
for another useful item).
    Potions are useful to any character, and if you’re playing 
a  spellcaster,  wands  and  scrolls  can  fi ll any gaps in your 
character’s spell lists. Knock, see invisibility, and similar spells 
are useful in certain situations, but they lack the overall 
utility to make them worth preparing.
 1st-Level Cha racters: Beginning characters are a special 
case because they don’t have wealth comparable to 1st-level 
NPCs. To equip a 1st-level PC quickly, consult the starting 
packages for your class in Chapter 1 or 2.
Table A–4: PC and NPC Wealth by Level
 Character Level NPC Wealth PC Wealth
           1st           900           gp           Varies           by           class
 2nd 2,000 gp 900 gp
 3rd 2,500 gp 2,700 gp
 4th 3,300 gp 5,400 gp
 5th 4,300 gp 9,000 gp
 6th 5,600 gp 13,000 gp
 7th 7,200 gp 19,000 gp
 8th 9,400 gp 27,000 gp
 9th 12,000 gp 36,000 gp
 10th 16,000 gp 49,000 gp
 11th 21,000 gp 66,000 gp
 12th 27,000 gp 88,000 gp
 13th 35,000 gp 110,000 gp
 14th 45,000 gp 150,000 gp
 15th 59,000 gp 200,000 gp
 16th 77,000 gp 260,000 gp
 17th 100,000 gp 340,000 gp
 18th 130,000 gp 440,000 gp
 19th 170,000 gp 580,000 gp
 20th 220,000 gp 760,000 gp
Table A–5: PC Remaining Budget by Level
Character Level Budget
  1st —
  2nd Use 1st-level NPC*
  3rd 200 gp
  4th 2,100 gp
  5th 4,700 gp
  6th 7,400 gp
  7th 11,800 gp
  8th 17,600 gp
  9th 24,000 gp
10th                               33,000                               gp
11th                                45,000                                gp
12th                               61,000                               gp
13th                               75,000                               gp
14th                               105,000                               gp
15th                               141,000                               gp
16th                               183,000                               gp
17th                               240,000                               gp
18th                               310,000                               gp
19th                               410,000                               gp
20th                               540,000                               gp
*1st-level NPCs and 2nd-level PCs have identical 900-gp 
budgets for gear.
A LA CARTE SHOPPING
If you prefer to star t from scratch, or i f you need g uidance on 
how to spend your excess cash after acquiring an NPC gear 
package, the following steps can help you focus your search 
for cool items that will help your character survive. (The 
rapid character creation process described in this appendix 
uses this method.)
    1. Buy standard adventuring necessities.
    2. Buy the weapon you want (or two, if that fits your 
character).
     3. Buy the best armor you can afford with your remain-
ing gold.
     4. Buy ability enhancers (low-level characters can skip 
this step).
     5. Buy miscellaneous equipment (low-level characters can 
skip this step).
    6. Save any money left over.
     1.  Every  character  should  own  the  necessities  of  
dungeon delving. The standard adventurer’s kit costs 15 
gp and includes a backpack, a belt pouch, a bedroll, fl  int  and  
steel, two sunrods, ten days worth of trail rations, 50 feet 
of hempen rope, and a waterskin (the bedroll is free as part 
of the package deal). The individual prices of these items, 
along with a few others of use to certain character classes, 
are given in the table below. If you can’t afford the whole 
adventurer’s kit, you can simply drop items from it until it 
fi  ts your budget. If you want any of the optional items, you 
must pay for those separately.
     You need an additional piece of equipment i f you’re a cler ic 
(a holy symbol for 1 gp); a beguiler, rogue, or scout (thieves’ 
tools for 30 g p); or a wizard (spellbook for 15 g p, assuming it 
contains the minimum number of spells known). If you’re a 
spellcaster of any kind, you probably want a spell component 
pouch (for 5 gp) as well.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   215620_95374_Ch8.indd   2152/8/06   4:26:59 PM2/8/06   4:26:59 PM

216
APPENDIX
Table A–6: Necessities
Standard Adventurer’s Kit (15 gp)
   Backpack   2   gp
   Belt pouch 1 gp
   Bedroll   1   sp
   Flint and steel 1 gp
   Hempen rope (50 ft.) 1 gp
   Sunrods   (2)   4   gp
   Trail rations (10 days) 5 gp
   Waterskin   1   gp
Optional Items
   Holy symbol 1 gp
   Spell component pouch 5 gp
   Spellbook   15   gp
   Thieves’ tools 30 gp
     2. Buy Weapon: Unless you’re playing a sorcerer or wizard, 
spend about half of your wealth on the most expensive melee 
or ranged weapon available, depending on whether you prefer 
melee or ranged combat. First, choose which weapon you 
want to use—morningstar, bastard sword, longbow, or the 
like. (Use the suggestions above for equipment and starting 
packages if you wish.) Make it masterwork (+300 gp, or +300 
gp per side if it’s a double weapon). If the weapon is a longbow 
or shortbow, make it composite, adding a strength rating equal 
to your character’s Strength bonus (+100 gp per plus). Next, 
make the weapon magic, giving it an enhancement bonus on 
attack and damage rolls. The applicable costs are summarized 
on Table A–7: Weapon Enhancement Bonuses.
Table A–7: Weapon Enhancement Bonuses
Enhancement Bonus Cost
+1                                        2,000                                        gp
+2                                        8,000                                        gp
+3                                      18,000                                      gp
+4                                      32,000                                      gp
+5                                      50,000                                      gp
+6*                                   72,000                                   gp
+7*                                    98,000                                    gp
+8*                                  128,000                                  gp
+9*                                  162,000                                  gp
+10*                               200,000                               gp
*A weapon cannot have an enhancement bonus above 
+5 unless it is epic; instead, the weapon has one or more 
special properties. See DMG 223.
If you’re playing a sorcerer or wizard, you’ll want to spend a 
good chunk of money on a wand, staff, and/or ability-enhanc-
ing item (a headband of intellect or cloak of Charisma) instead of 
buying an expensive weapon. (See Buy Ability Enhancers, 
below, for more information.)
     3.     Buy     Armor:     If your character wears armor, spend a hefty 
portion (maybe three-quarters) of your remaining funds on 
armor. Include a shield if you use one.
    You want the best armor with which the character is 
proficient—namely full plate armor if he can wear heavy 
armor (go with banded mail if you can’t afford full plate 
armor), a breastplate if medium armor is the heaviest he can 
wear, or a chain shirt if he can wear only light armor. Buy 
the armor, then make it masterwork (+150 gp). Next, make 
the armor magic, giving it an enhancement bonus to AC. 
The applicable costs are summarized on Table A–8: Armor 
Enhancement Bonuses.
Table A–8: Armor Enhancement Bonuses
Enhancement Bonus Cost
+1                                        1,000                                        gp
+2                                        4,000                                        gp
+3                                        9,000                                        gp
+4                                      16,000                                      gp
+5                                      25,000                                      gp
+6*                                   36,000                                   gp
+7*                                    49,000                                    gp
+8*                                   64,000                                   gp
+9*                                    81,000                                    gp
+10*                                100,000                                gp
*A suit of armor or shield cannot have an enhancement 
bonus above +5 unless it is epic; instead, the armor has 
one or more special properties. See DMG 217.
    If your character is a sorcerer, monk, wizard, or other 
character who doesn’t wear armor, spend some gold on other 
defensive items instead. Bracers of armor are a good choice, and 
you might supplement these with a ring of protection and/or an 
amulet of natural armor. A cloak of displacement is an excellent 
choice if you can afford it, and a ring of invisibility is one of 
the best protection items around.
     4. Buy Ability Enhancers: You should have about 25–30% 
of your starting gold left now. You have many options avail-
able for spending that cash—the Dungeon Master’s Guide has 
a truly prodigious selection of magic items, and other books 
add even more to this list. For simplicity and speed, however, 
it ’s best to spend this gold on abi l it y enhancers. Your options 
are gauntlets of ogre power, belt of giant strength (Strength), gloves 
of Dex ter ity, amulet of health (Constitution), headband of intellect 
(Intelligence), periapt of Wisdom, and cloak of Charisma.
 Decide  which  ability  scores  are  most  important  to  you  
and buy items that provide enhancement bonuses to these 
abi l ities. Each item adds a +2 (for 4,0 0 0 g p), + 4 (for 16,0 0 0 g p), 
or +6 (for 36,000 gp) enhancement bonus to the appropriate 
ability score. The only exceptions are gauntlets of ogre power, 
which offer only a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength, and 
the belt of giant strength, which gives a +4 or +6 enhancement 
bonus to Strength.
     If you are creating an extremely high-level character, spend 
some  cash  on  inherent  ability  bonuses  (which  you  can  get  
from manuals of bodily health and the like). Inherent bonuses 
cost 27,500 gp for each +1, and your character can have up to 
a +5 inherent bonus on any ability score.
     5. Buy Miscellaneous Equipment: Spend the rest of 
your gold on some minor magic trinkets. A cloak of resistance 
provides a +1 resistance bonus on saving throws for 1,000 
gp, +2 for 4,000 gp, +3 for 9,000 gp, +4 for 16,000 gp, or +5 
for 25,000 gp. A few potions of cure wounds are also in order, 
since restoration of lost hit points is good for everyone. You 
can buy a potion of cure light wounds (restores 1d8+1 hit points) 
for 50 gp, a potion of cure moderate wounds (restores 2d8+3 
hp) for 300 gp, and a potion of cure serious wounds (restores 
3d8+5 hp) for 750 gp. If you’re playing a spellcaster, pick 
620_95374_Ch8.indd   216620_95374_Ch8.indd   2162/8/06   4:27:06 PM2/8/06   4:27:06 PM

217
APPENDIX
up a few wands or scrolls of utilitarian spells, such as knock 
and water breathing. 
EQUIPMENT BY LEVEL
The following tables detail appropriate NPC equipment for 
each level of the various classes. Each set of equipment also 
includes  an  adventurer’s  kit  (see  page  215)  and  any  other  
items necessary for the character (such as a spellbook, spell 
component pouch, thieves’ tools, or holy symbol).
Barbarian, Dragon Shaman, Druid
1
, Duskblade
2
, 
or Favored Soul
 1st Level: Masterwork weapon, masterwork breastplate 
(or  masterwork  hide  armor,  185  gp),  heavy  steel  shield,  
200 gp
 2nd Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 breastplate (or master-
work  dragonhide  breastplate,  650  gp),  heavy  steel  shield,  
350 gp
 3rd Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 breastplate (or master-
work dragonhide breastplate, 650 gp), heavy steel shield, 
850 gp
 4th Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 breastplate (or master-
work dragonhide breastplate, 650 gp), heavy steel shield, cloak 
of resistance +1, 650 g p
 5th Level: +1 weapon, +1 breastplate (or master work dragon-
hide breastplate, 650 gp), heavy steel shield, 650 gp
 6th Level: +1 weapon, +1 breastplate (or master work dragon-
hide breastplate, 650 gp), +1 heavy steel shield, 800 gp
 7th Level: +1 weapon, +1 breastplate (or master work dragon-
hide breastplate, 650 gp), +1 heavy steel shield (or potion of barkskin 
+3, potion of shield of faith +4), cloak of resistance +1, 50 gp
 8th Level: +1 weapon, +2 breastplate (or +1 dragonhide breast-
plate, r ing of protection +1, 650 gp), +1 heavy steel shield (or potion 
of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), 250 gp
 9th Level: +1 weapon, +2 breastplate (or +2 dragonhide breast-
plate, -350 gp), +1 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural armor 
+1, potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), 850 gp
 10t h L e ve l : +2 weapon, +2 breastplate (or +1 dragonhide breast-
plate, r ing of protection +1, 650 gp), +1 heavy steel shield (or potion 
of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), 850 gp
 11t h L e vel : +2 weapon, +2 breastplate (or +2 dragonhide breast-
plate, -350  gp),  +1  heavy  steel  shield  (or potion  of  barkskin  +3,  
potion of shield of faith +4), gauntlets of ogre power (or periapt of 
Wisdom +2), cloak of resistance +1, 850 gp
 12th  Level: +2 weapon, +3 breastplate (or +3 dragonhide breast-
plate, -350  gp),  +1  heavy  steel  shield  (or potion  of  barkskin  +3,  
potion of shield of faith +4), gauntlets of ogre power (or periapt of 
Wisdom +2), cloak of resistance +1, brooch of shielding, 350 gp
 13th  Level: +3 weapon, +3 breastplate (or +3 dragonhide 
breastplate, -350 gp), +1 heavy steel shield (or potion of barkskin 
+3, potion of shield of faith +4), gauntlets of ogre power (or periapt 
of Wisdom +2), 850 gp
 14t h   L e v e l : +3 weapon, +4 breastplate (or +4 dragonhide 
breastplate, -350 gp), +2 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
armor +1, ring of protection +1, 200 gp), gauntlets of ogre power 
(or periapt of Wisdom +2), cloak of resistance +1, 850 gp
 15th Level: +4 weapon, +4 breastplate (or +4 dragonhide 
breastplate, -350 gp), +2 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
armor +1, ring of protection +1, 200 gp), gauntlets of ogre power 
(or periapt of Wisdom +2), cloak of resistance +1, 850 gp
 16t h   L e ve l : +4 weapon, +4 breastplate  (or  +4 dragonhide 
breastplate, -350 gp), +2 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
ar mor +1, r ing of protection +1, 200 gp), belt of g iant s treng th +4 
(or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance +2, dust of disap-
pearance, 350 gp
 17th  Level:  +5  weapon,  +4  breastplate  (or  +4  dragonhide  
breastplate, -350 gp), +2 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
ar mor +1, r ing of protection +1, 200 gp), belt of g iant s treng th +4 
(or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance +3, dust of disap-
pearance, 350 gp
 18t h  L e vel :  +5  weapon,  +5  breastplate  (or  +5  dragonhide  
breastplate, -350 gp), +3 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
armor +1, gloves of Dexterity +2, ring of protection +1, 1,200 gp), belt 
of giant strength +4 (or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance 
+3, dust of disappearance, winged boots, 350 gp
 19th  Level:  +6  weapon,  +6  breastplate  (or  +6  dragonhide  
breastplate, -350 gp), +4 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
armor  +2,  gloves  of  Dexterity  +2,  ring  of  protection  +1,  2,200 
gp), belt of giant strength +4 (or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of 
resistance +3, dust of disappearance, winged boots, 350 gp
 20th  Level:  +7  weapon,  +6 breastplate (or  +6  dragonhide  
breastplate, -350 gp), +6 heavy steel shield (or amulet of natural 
armor +3, gloves of Dexterity +2, ioun stone (dusty rose), ring of 
protection +2, 1,200 gp), belt of giant strength +4 (or periapt of 
Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance +3, dust of disappearance, winged 
boots, 4,350 gp
     1 Druid characters should replace heavy steel shield with 
heavy wooden shield, 13 gp. 
    2 Duskblade characters below 4th level should replace 
breastplate with chain shirt, 100 gp; duskblades below 7th 
level should replace heavy steel shield with light steel shield, 
11 gp.
Bard, Hexblade, Ranger, Rogue, Scout, 
or Swashbuckler
 1st  Level:  Masterwork  weapon,  masterwork  studded  
leather, elixir of hiding, 50 gp
 2nd Level: Masterwork weapon, mithral shirt, masterwork 
secondary weapon, elixir of hiding, 50 gp
 3rd Level: Masterwork weapon, mithral shirt, masterwork 
secondary weapon, elixir of hiding, elixir of sneaking, 300 gp
 4th Level: Masterwork weapon, mithral shirt, masterwork 
secondary weapon, goggles of minute seeing, 350 gp
 5th Level: +1 weapon, mithral shirt, masterwork secondary 
weapon, elixir of hiding, 350 gp
 6th Level: +1 weapon, +1 mithral shir t, masterwork second-
ary weapon, elixir of hiding, 650 g p
 7th  Level:  +1  weapon,  +1  mithral  shir t,  +1  secondary  
weapon, elixir of hiding, 250 gp
 8th  Level:  +1  weapon,  +1  mithral  shir t,  +1  secondary  
weapon, cloak of elvenkind, 200 gp
 9th  Level:  +1  weapon,  +1  mithral  shir t,  +1  secondary  
weapon, boots of elvenkind, cloak of elvenkind, 300 gp
 10t h  L e ve l :  +1  weapon,  +1  mithral  shir t, +1 secondary 
weapon, boots of elvenkind, cloak of elvenkind, gloves of Dexterity 
+2, 400 gp
620_95374_Ch8.indd   217620_95374_Ch8.indd   2172/8/06   4:27:13 PM2/8/06   4:27:13 PM

218
APPENDIX
 11t h  L e vel : +2 weapon, +1  mithral  shir t, masterwork sec-
ondary weapon, boots of elvenkind, cloak of elvenkind, gloves of 
Dexterity +2, 1,300 gp
 12th  Level:  +2  weapon,  +2  mithral  shirt, +1 secondary 
weapon, boots of elvenkind, cloak of elvenkind, gloves of Dexterity 
+2, ring of protection +1, 300 gp
13th Level: +2 weapon, +2 mithral shirt, +1 secondary weapon, 
boots of elvenkind, cape of the mountebank, gloves of Dexterity +2, 
ring of protection +1, 200 gp
 14t h   L e v e l :  +3  weapon,  +2  mithral  shirt,  +1  secondary  
weapon,  boots  of  elvenkind,  cape  of  the  mountebank,  gloves  of  
Dexterity +2, ring of protection +1, 800 gp
 15th  Level:  +3  weapon,  +3  mithral  shirt, +2 secondary 
weapon, boots of elvenkind, cape of the mountebank, gloves of 
Dexterity +2, chime of opening, ring of protection +1, 800 gp
 16t h   L e ve l : +4 weapon, +4 mithral shirt, +2 secondary 
weapon,  boots  of  elvenkind,  cape  of  the  mountebank,  gloves  of  
Dexterity +2, ring of protection +1, 800 gp
 17th  Level: +4 weapon, +5  mithral  shirt, +2 secondary 
weapon, cape of the mountebank, gloves of Dexterity +2, ring of 
protection +1, winged boots, 1,300 gp
 18t h  L e vel :  +5  weapon,  +5  mithral  shirt, +3 secondary 
weapon, cape of the mountebank, gloves of Dexterity +2, ring of 
protection +1, winged boots, 3,300 gp
 19th  Level: +6 weapon, +5  mithral  shirt, +4 secondary 
weapon, gloves of Dexterity +4, ring of protection +1, winged boots, 
ioun stone (dusty rose), 300 gp
 20th  Level: +6 weapon, +6 mithral shirt, +3 secondary 
weapon, amulet of natural armor +1, cape of the mountebank, 
gloves of Dexterity +4, ring of protection +2, winged boots, ioun 
stone (dusty rose), 3,300 gp
Beguiler, Sorcerer, Warmage, or Wizard
 1st  Level: Masterwork weapon, masterwork chain shirt 
(or 250 gp), 350 gp
 2nd Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 chain shirt (or bracers 
of armor +1, 250 gp), 450 gp.
 3rd Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 chain shir t (or bracers of 
armor +1, 250 gp), 950 gp
 4th Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 chain shir t (or bracers of 
armor +1, 250 gp), cloak of resistance +1, 750 gp
 5th Level: Masterwork weapon, +1 chain shirt (or bracers of 
armor +1, 250 gp), ring of protection +1, 750 gp
 6th Level: Masterwork weapon, +2 chain shirt (or bracers of 
armor +2, 250 gp), cloak of resistance +1, 50 gp
 7th Level: Masterwork weapon, +2 chain shirt (or bracers of 
armor +2, 250 gp), cloak of resistance +1, 1,650 gp
 8th Level: Masterwork weapon, +2 chain shirt (or bracers of 
armor +2, 250 gp), cloak of Charisma +2 (or headband of intellect 
+2), 850 gp
 9th Level: Masterwork weapon, +2 chain shirt (or bracers of 
armor +2, 250 gp), cloak of Charisma +2 (or headband of intellect 
+2), amulet of natural armor +1, 1,450 gp
 10t h L e ve l : Masterwork weapon, +3 chain shirt (or bracers of 
armor +3, 250 gp), cloak of Charisma +2 (or headband of intellect 
+2), ring of protection +2, 450 gp
 11t h L e vel : Masterwork weapon, +3 mithral shirt (or brac-
ers of armor +3, 1,250 gp), cloak of Charisma +2 (or headband 
of intellect +2), ring of protection +1, gloves of arrow snaring, 
450 gp
 12th Level: Masterwork weapon, +4 mithral shirt (or brac-
ers  of  armor  +4,  1,250  gp),  cloak  of  Charisma  +2  (or  headband  
of intellect +2), amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, 
1,450 gp
 13th Level: Masterwork weapon, +4 mithral shirt (or brac-
ers  of  armor  +4,  1,250  gp),  cloak  of  Charisma  +2  (or  headband  
of intellect +2), amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +2, 
3,450 gp
 14t h   L e v e l : Masterwork weapon, +4 mithral shirt (or brac-
ers of armor +4,  1,250  gp),  cloak  of  Charisma  +4  (or headband 
of intellect +4), amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +2, 
1,450 gp
 15th Level: Masterwork weapon, +5 mithral shirt (or brac-
ers  of  armor  +5,  1,250  gp),  cloak  of  Charisma  +4  (or  headband  
of intellect +4), amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +2, 
gauntlets of Dexterity +2 (or cloak of resistance +2), 3,700 gp
 16t h  L e ve l : Masterwork weapon, +5 mithral shirt (or brac-
ers of armor +5, 1,250 gp), cloak of Charisma +6 (or headband of 
intellect  +6),  amulet  of  natural  armor  +1,  ring  of  protection  +2, 
gauntlets of Dexterity +2 (or cloak of resistance +2), 450 gp
 17th Level: Masterwork weapon, +5 mithral shirt (or bracers of 
armor +5, 1,250 gp), cloak of Charisma +6 (or headband of intellect 
+6), robe of scintillating colors, ring of protection +2, 3,700 gp
 18t h  L e vel : Rod  of  absorption, bracers  of  armor  +5, cloak  of  
Charisma +6 (or headband of intellect +6), ring of protection +2, 
gauntlets of Dexterity +2 (or cloak of resistance +2), 5,450 gp
 19th  Level: Staff  of  evocation  (or  staff  of  enchantment), +7 
mithral shirt (or bracers of armor +7, 1,250 gp), cloak of Charisma 
+6 (or headband of intellect +6), ring of protection +2, gauntlets of 
Dexterity +2 (or cloak of resistance +2), 6,450 gp
 20th  Level: Staff  of  evocation  (or  staff  of  enchantment), +7 
mithral shirt (or bracers of armor +7, 1,250 gp), cloak of Charisma 
+6 (or headband of intellect +6), ring of protection +2, boots  of  
teleportation, 3,450 gp
Cleric, Fighter, Knight, Marshal, or Paladin
 1st Level: Masterwork weapon, masterwork banded mail, 
heavy steel shield, 200 gp
 2nd Level: Masterwork weapon, full plate armor, heavy 
steel shield, 200 gp
 3rd  Level:  Masterwork  weapon,  full  plate  armor,  heavy  
steel shield, 700 gp
 4th Level: Masterwork weapon, full plate armor, heavy steel 
shield, cloak of resistance +1 (or pearl of power [1st level]), 500 gp
 5th Level: +1 weapon, full plate armor, heavy steel shield, 
500 gp
 6th Level: +1 weapon, +1 full plate ar mor, heavy steel shield, 
650 g p
 7th Level: +1 weapon, +1 full plate ar mor, +1 heavy steel 
shield (or potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), cloak 
of resistance +1 (or pearl of power [1st level]), 50 gp
 8th Level: +1 weapon, +2 full plate armor, +1 heavy steel shield 
(or potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), 250 gp
 9th Level: +1 weapon, +2 full plate armor, +1 heavy steel shield 
(or  amulet  of  natural  armor  +1,  potion  of  barkskin  +3,  potion  of  
shield of faith +4), 850 gp
620_95374_Ch8.indd   218620_95374_Ch8.indd   2182/8/06   4:27:20 PM2/8/06   4:27:20 PM

219
APPENDIX
 10t h  L e ve l :  +1  weapon,  +2  full  plate  armor, +1 heavy steel 
shield (or potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), gauntlets 
of ogre power (or periapt of Wisdom +2), 850 gp
 11t h  L e vel : +2 weapon, +2 full plate armor, +1 heavy steel 
shield (or potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), gaunt-
lets of ogre power (or periapt of Wisdom +2), cloak of resistance 
+1, 850 gp
 12th Level: +2 weapon, +3 full plate armor, +1 heavy steel shield 
(or potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), gauntlets of 
ogre power (or per iapt of Wisdom +2), cloak of resistance +1, brooch 
of shielding, 350 gp
 13th Level: +3 weapon, +3 full plate armor, +1 heavy steel shield 
(or potion of barkskin +3, potion of shield of faith +4), gauntlets of 
ogre power (or periapt of Wisdom +2), 850 gp
 14t h   L e v e l :  +3  weapon,  +4  full  plate  armor, +2  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, 200 
gp), gauntlets  of  ogre  power  (or  periapt  of  Wisdom  +2), cloak  of  
resistance +1, 850 gp
 15th  Level: +4 weapon, +4  full  plate  armor, +2  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, 200 
gp), gauntlets  of  ogre  power  (or  periapt  of  Wisdom  +2),  cloak  of  
resistance +1, 850 gp
 16t h   L e ve l : +4 weapon, +4  full  plate  armor, +2  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, 200 
gp), belt of giant strength +4 (or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of 
resistance +2, dust of disappearance, 350 gp
 17th  Level:  +5  weapon,  +4  full  plate  armor, +2  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, 200 
gp), belt of giant strength +4 (or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of 
resistance +3, dust of disappearance, 350 gp
 18t h  L e vel :  +5  weapon,  +5  full  plate  armor, +3  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +1, gloves of Dexterity +2, ring 
of protection +1, 1,200 gp), belt of giant strength +4 (or periapt of 
Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance +3, dust of disappearance, winged 
boots, 350 gp
 19th  Level: +6 weapon, +6 full plate armor, +4  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +2, gloves of Dexterity +2, ring 
of protection +1, 2,200 gp), belt of giant strength +4 (or periapt of 
Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance +3, dust of disappearance, winged 
boots, 350 gp
 20th  Level:  +7  weapon,  +6 full plate armor, +6  heavy  steel  
shield (or amulet of natural armor +3, gloves of Dexterity +2, ioun 
stone  (dusty  rose),  ring of protection +2, 1,200 gp), belt of giant 
strength +4 (or periapt of Wisdom +4), cloak of resistance +3, dust 
of disappearance, winged boots, 4,350 gp
Monk
 1st Level: Masterwork weapon, 600 gp
 2nd Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +1, 700 gp
 3rd  Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +1, cloak 
of resistance +1, 200 gp
 4th  Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +1, cloak 
of resistance +1, elixir of sneaking, 750 g p
 5th Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +1, amulet 
of natural armor +1, cloak of resistance +1, 0 gp
 6th Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +1, amulet 
of natural armor +1, cloak of resistance +1, salve of slipperiness, 
300 gp
 7th Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +1, amulet 
of natural armor +1, brooch of shielding, cloak of resistance +1, 
400 gp
 8th Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +2, amulet 
of natural armor +1, brooch of shielding, cloak of resistance +1, 
600 gp
 9th Level: Masterwork weapon, bracers of armor +2, amulet 
of natural armor +1, brooch of shielding, cloak of resistance +2, 
200 gp
 10t h  L e ve l : Amulet of mighty fi sts +1, bracers  of  armor  +2,  
gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +1, 1,000 gp
 11t h  L e vel : Amulet  of  mighty  fi  sts  +1, bracers  of  armor  +3,  
gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +1, 1,000 gp
 12th  Level: Amulet of mighty fi sts +1, bracers  of  armor  +3,  
gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +2, dust of disappearance, 
500 gp
 13th  Level: Amulet  of  mighty  fi  sts  +1, bracers  of  armor  +4,  
gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +3, 0 gp
 14t h   L e v e l : Amulet  of  mighty  fi  sts  +1, bracers  of  armor  +5,  
gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +3, 1,000 gp
 15th  Level: Amulet  of  mighty  fists  +1, bracers  of  armor  
+5, gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +3, monk’s belt, 
2,000 gp
 16t h   L e ve l : Amulet  of  mighty  fists  +2, bracers  of  armor  
+5, gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +3, monk’s belt, 
2,000 gp
 17th Level: +4 weapon, bracers of armor +5, gauntlets of ogre 
power,  cloak  of  resistance  +3,  monk’s  belt, periapt  of  Wisdom  +4,  
700 gp
 18t h L e vel : +4 weapon, bracers of armor +7, gauntlets of ogre 
power,  cloak  of  resistance  +3,  monk’s  belt, periapt  of  Wisdom  +4,  
ring of jumping, ring of protection +1, 2,200 gp
 19th Level: +4 weapon, bracers of armor +8, gauntlets of ogre 
power,  cloak  of  resistance  +4,  monk’s  belt, periapt  of  Wisdom  +4,  
ring of protection +2, winged boots, 1,000 gp
 20th Level: +5 weapon, bracers of armor +8, gauntlets of ogre 
power,  cloak  of  resistance  +5,  monk’s  belt, periapt  of  Wisdom  +4,  
ring of protection +4, winged boots, 0 gp
8. PICK YOUR SPELLS
    Choosing spells can be a time-consuming process. This 
section offers a list of standard, high-utility spells at each spell 
level, arranged from most to least useful, for each spellcasting 
class. If you are at a loss for which spells to take at a given 
level, these lists can help narrow your search.
    Limiting the spells you choose to those on the following 
lists saves both time and effort. If desired, however, you can 
supplement these lists with specifi  c spells that you prefer.
SUGGESTED BARD SPELLS
 0: Detect magic, read magic, prestidigitation, lullaby, summon 
instrument, mage hand.
 1st: Cure light wounds, charm person, identify, disguise self, alarm.
    2nd: Cure moderate wounds, suggestion, invisibility, eagle’s 
splendor, heroism.
 3rd: Cure serious wounds, haste, dispel magic, charm monster, 
displacement.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   219620_95374_Ch8.indd   2192/8/06   4:27:27 PM2/8/06   4:27:27 PM

220
APPENDIX
 4th: Cure critical wounds, greater invisibility, dominate person, 
hold monster, dimension door.
 5th: Mass cure light wounds, greater dispel magic, mass sugges-
tion, persistent image, greater heroism.
 6th: Mass cure moderate wounds, Ot to’s ir resis tible dance, g reater 
shout, project image.
SUGGESTED CLERIC SPELLS 
(POSITIVE ENERGY CHANNELERS*)
    0: Detect magic, light, resistance, read magic, detect poison, 
guidance.
 1st: Shield of faith, bless, protection from evil, magic weapon, 
sanctuary, divine favor, command, comprehend languages.
 2nd: Hold person, bull’s strength, spiritual weapon, lesser 
restoration, infl ict moderate wounds, resist energy, align weapon, 
augury.
 3rd: Dispel magic, prayer, blindness/deafness, protection from 
energy, magic circle against evil, invisibility purge, searing light, 
glyph of warding.
 4th: Divine power, infl  ict critical wounds, restoration, dismissal, 
freedom of movement, greater magic weapon, spell immunity, death 
ward.
 5th: Flame strike, true seeing, spell resistance, righteous might, mass 
infl ict light wounds, scrying, plane shift, disrupting weapon.
 6th: Heal, greater dispel magic, harm, blade barrier, banishment, 
mass bull’s strength, fi nd the path.
 7th: Greater restoration, holy word, greater scrying, destruction, 
ethereal jaunt, repulsion.
 8th: Fire storm, holy aura, antimagic fi eld, mass infl ict critical 
wounds, greater spell immunity.
 9th: Mass heal, implosion, miracle, true resurrection, ethereal-
ness, storm of vengeance.
    *Negative energy channelers should select a cure spell as 
their second spell of each level (for spell levels 1–4) and as 
their third spell of each level (for levels 5–8).
SUGGESTED 
DRAGON SHAMAN AURAS
Vigor, Senses, Power, Energy Shield, Toughness, Presence, 
Resistance
SUGGESTED DRUID SPELLS
 0: Detect magic, light, resistance, cure minor wounds, guidance, 
know direction.
 1st:  Cure  light  wounds,  shillelagh,  produce  fl  ame,  faerie  fi  re,  
entangle, charm animal, speak with animals.
 2nd: Flame blade, heat metal, resist energy, lesser restoration, 
bull’s strength, animal trance, barkskin.
 3rd: Cure moderate wounds, protection from energy, call lightning, 
meld into stone, dominate animal, stone shape, spike growth.
 4th: Cure serious wounds, fl  ame strike, dispel magic, command 
plants, scrying, freedom of movement.
 5th: Cure critical wounds, stoneskin, baleful polymorph, wall 
of fi re, call lightning storm, commune with nature, death ward.
 6th: Mass cure light wounds, fi  re seeds, greater dispel magic, mass 
bull’s strength, transport via plants, wall of stone.
 7th: Mass cure moderate wounds, heal, fi re storm, true seeing, 
changestaff, greater scrying.
 8th: Mass cure serious wounds, fi nger of death, animal shapes, 
sunburst, word of recall, whirlwind.
 9th: Mass cure critical wounds, shapechange, elemental swarm, 
foresight, storm of vengeance, shambler.
SUGGESTED DUSKBLADE SPELLS
 0: Ray of frost, touch of fatigue, acid splash, disrupt undead
 1st:  Ray  of  enfeeblement,  shocking  grasp,  resist  energy,  swift  
expeditious retreat, true strike.
 2nd: Scorching ray, see invisibility, swift invisibility, swift fl y, 
cat’s grace.
 3rd: Ray of exhaustion, crown of protection*, keen edge, protec-
tion from energy, vampiric touch.
 4th:  Channeled  pyroburst*,  dimension  door,  enervation,  fi  re  
shield, shout.
 5th: Chain lightning, waves of fatigue, disintegrate, polar ray, 
hold monster.
    *New spell (see pages 106 and 108).
SUGGESTED FAVORED SOUL SPELLS
 0: Cure minor wounds, detect magic, light, resistance, read magic, 
detect poison.
 1st: Cure light wounds, bless, shield of faith, divine favor, entropic 
shield, remove fear, comprehend languages.
 2nd: Cure moderate wounds, spiritual weapon, lesser restoration, 
align weapon, delay poison, bull’s strength.
 3rd: Dispel magic, searing light, prayer, invisibility purge, 
daylight, magic circle against evil.
 4th: Cure critical wounds, divine power, neutralize poison, 
freedom of movement, tongues, dimensional anchor.
 5th: Flame strike, true seeing, righteous might, spell resistance, 
disrupting weapon, wall of stone.
 6th: Heal, blade barrier, mass cure moderate wounds, greater 
dispel magic, heroes’ feast, harm.
 7th: Holy word, destruction, greater scrying, summon monster 
VII, ethereal jaunt, greater restoration.
 8th: Mass cure critical wounds, holy aura, fi re storm, summon 
monster VIII, antimagic fi eld.
 9th: Mass heal, implosion, summon monster IX, true resurrection.
SUGGESTED HEXBLADE SPELLS
 1st: phantom threat
1
, expeditious retreat, Tasha’s hideous laugh-
ter, protection from evil, entropic shield.
 2nd: invisibility, false life, see invisibility, eagle’s splendor, spider 
climb.
 3rd: vampiric touch, confusion, protection from energy, hound 
of doom
1
, wind wall.
 4th: greater invisibility, dimension door, enervation, cursed 
blade
1
, solid fog.
    1    See Complete Warrior.
SUGGESTED MARSHAL AURAS
1
 Minor: Master of Tactics, Force of Wi l l, Motivate Dex ter-
ity, Motivate Strength, Watchful Eye, Master of Opportunity, 
Determined Caster.
 Major: Motivate  Care,  Motivate  Attack,  Hardy  Soldiers,  
Motivate Urgency, Resilient Troops.
    1    See    Miniatures Handbook.
620_95374_Ch8.indd   220620_95374_Ch8.indd   2202/8/06   4:27:34 PM2/8/06   4:27:34 PM

221
APPENDIX
SUGGESTED PALADIN SPELLS
 1st:  Bless  weapon,  divine  favor,  cure  light  wounds,  protection  
from evil, lesser restoration.
 2nd: Bull’s strength, eagle’s splendor, shield other, resist energy, 
remove paralysis.
 3rd: Dispel magic, greater magic weapon, magic circle against 
evil, discern lies, daylight.
 4th:  Holy  sword,  dispel  evil,  restoration,  break  enchantment,  
death ward.
SUGGESTED RANGER SPELLS
 1st:  Resist  energy,  entangle,  pass  without  trace,  speak  with  
animals, longstrider.
 2nd:  Snare,  protection  from  energy,  speak  with  plants,  bear’s  
endurance, cure light wounds.
 3rd: Darkvision, tree shape, cure moderate wounds, water walk, 
command plants.
     4th: Freedom of movement, tree stride, commune with nature, 
animal growth, cure serious wounds.
SUGGESTED SORCERER SPELLS
 0: Detect magic, read magic, ghost sound, disrupt undead, presti-
digitation, acid splash, mage hand, arcane mark, dancing lights.
 1st: Magic missile, mage armor, enlarge person, shield, expedi-
tious retreat.
 2nd:  Scorching  ray,  invisibility,  mirror  image,  alter  self,  
levitate.
 3rd: Fireball, dispel magic, haste, displacement.
 4th:  Stoneskin,  polymorph,  greater  invisibility,  phantasmal  
killer.
 5th: Cone of cold, teleport, Bigby’s interposing hand, dominate 
person.
 6th: Acid fog, greater dispel magic, Bigby’s forceful hand.
 7th: Prismatic spray, limited wish, ethereal jaunt.
 8th: Horrid wilting, iron body, prismatic wall.
 9th: Meteor swarm, wish, time stop.
SUGGESTED WARLOCK 
INVOCATIONS
1
 Least: See the unseen, sickening blast, eldritch spear.
 Lesser: Eldritch chain, fell fl ight, beshadowed blast.
 Greater: Vitriolic blast, devour magic, eldritch cone.
 Dark: Retributive invisibility, eldritch doom, utterdark blast.
    1    See Complete Arcane.
SUGGESTED WIZARD SPELLS
 0: Detect magic, read magic, disrupt undead, mage hand.
 1st: Magic missile, mage armor, charm person, color spray, silent 
image, disguise self, enlarge person, alarm.
     2nd: Scorching ray, invisibility, mirror image, alter self, levitate, 
spider climb, see invisibility, knock, darkvision.
 3rd: Fireball, dispel magic, displacement, haste, fl y, suggestion, 
tongues, water breathing.
 4th: Stoneskin, polymorph, greater invisibility, charm monster, 
lesser globe of invulnerability, scrying, wall of fi re, confusion.
 5th: Cone of cold, teleport, Bigby’s interposing hand, dominate 
person, hold monster, permanency, persistent image, passwall.
 6th: Chain lightning, g reater dispel mag ic, Tenser ’s trans for-
mation, Mordenkainen’s lucubration, contingency, true seeing, 
control water.
 7th: Prismatic spray, limited wish, ethereal jaunt, greater teleport, 
greater scrying, plane shift, mass invisibility, mass hold person.
 8th: Horrid wilting, iron body, prismatic wall, polymorph any 
object, protection from spells, Bigby’s clenched fi st, mind blank, 
dimensional lock.
 9th: Meteor swarm, wish, time stop, gate, etherealness, shape-
change, dominate monster, Bigby’s crushing hand.
RANDOM PERSONALITIES
If you want to create a character with a random personality, use 
the tables below. Roll once on the Random Personality Arche-
types  table,  then  roll  1d4  times  on  the  Random  Personality  
Traits table. You can fi  nd more information on the personality 
archetypes and personality traits in Chapter 5 of this book.
Random Personality Archetypes
Random Personality Traits
  d%  Archetype
01–04      Agent
05–09     Challenger
10 –13      Companion
14 –18      Crusader
19–22      Daredevil
23–27      Explorer
28–31      Innocent
32–36      Leader
37– 40      Mar t yr
41–44      Mercenary
45–48     Orphan
49–52      Prophet
  d%  Archetype
53–56      Rebel
57– 61      Renegade
62–65      Royalty
66–69     Sage
70 –73      Savage
74 –78      Seeker
79–82      Simple      Soul
83–86      Strategist
87–90      Theorist
91–95      Trickster
96–100    Wanderer
  d%  Trait
01– 02      Ambitious
03–04     Angry
05–06     Bold
07– 08      Boastful
09–10      Brutal
11–12       C ar e f r e e
13 –14      Calm
15 –16      Charming
17–18      Connected
19 –20      Conser vative
   21   Cowardly
   22   Cruel
23–24      Dark
25–26      Disciplined
27–28      Driven
29–30      Energetic
31–32      Erudite
33–34      Exotic
35–36      Famous
37–38      Fatalistic
39 – 40      Flamboyant
41– 42      Friendly
43– 44      Foul-mouthed
45–46      Funny
   47   Greedy
48–49     Hooked
50–51      Interested
  d%  Trait
52–53      Kind
54–55      Loyal
   56   Merciful
57–58      Militant
59 – 60      Mysterious
   61   Naïve
62–63      Quiet
64–65     Patriotic
66–67     Peaceful
68–69     Philosophical
   70   Phobic
71–72      Proper
73–74      Reformed
75–76      Religious
77–78      Reluctant
79–80     Rude
81–82      Secretive
83–84      Self-absorbed
85–86      Self-righteous
   87   Selfi   sh
88–89      Serious
90 –91      Skilled
92–93      Threatening
94–95     Tragic
96–97      Unpredictable
98–99     Vengeful
  100  Violent
620_95374_Ch8.indd   221620_95374_Ch8.indd   2212/8/06   4:27:41 PM2/8/06   4:27:41 PM

D
UNGEONS
 & D
RAGONS
®
™
Whether you’re creating a new character or 
improving an existing one, the Player’s Handbook
TM
 II 
supplement has something you need. This volume 
provides new character options for players, including:
j
 New class features for all of your favorite classes
j
 A rebuilding system that allows you to update 
 
existing characters
j
 
New advancement options and affi liations
j
 
New starting equipment packages 
j
 
New teamwork benefi ts
j
 
New feats and spells
Featuring Additional Design by 
Richard Baker, Bruce R. Cordell, Frank Brunner, Luke Johnson, 
Christopher Lindsay, Robert J. Schwalb, and Matthew Sernett
David Noonan
MAKE YOUR 
CHARACTERS THE BEST 
THEY CAN BE
For use with these DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
® 
 
core books
Player’s Handbook
TM
, Dungeon Master’s Guide
®
, 
and Monster Manual
®
.
Visit our website at www.wizards.com/dnd
Supplement
EAN
Sug. Retail U.S. $34.95  CAN $44.00      953747200  
Printed in the U.S.A.   
ISBN 13: 978-0-7869-3918-3
D
UNGEONS
 & D
RAGONS
®
™
Players Handbook II.indd   1Players Handbook II.indd   12/16/07   2:20:19 PM2/16/07   2:20:19 PM