CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
involved in working out the ground rules for the group. The 
DM needs to be involved in the process as well, since the tone 
and nature of the charter will probably affect the overall fl  ow  
of the campaign.
    The    fi  rst order of business is to defi  ne the purpose of your 
group and decide on its short-term and long-term goals. Next, 
determine what kinds of characters your group will accept 
as  members.  Choose  an  alignment  and  exclude  characters  
who have alignments more than a step or two away from that 
one. For instance, if your charter demands that the group be 
committed to order and goodness, you probably wouldn’t 
want to accept a chaotic evil character. You can also extend 
the restrictions to cover certain classes, races, and even house 
rules if desired, as long as those limitations can be framed 
in the context of the game world. You should also consider 
what functions are needed—does the group have a divine 
spellcaster, a person who can disable traps, a melee combat-
ant and a ranged fi ghter, and so forth? Finally, consider the 
types of employers your characters are willing to work for 
and what kind of missions they will accept.
     Once  your  charter  is  complete,  write  it  out  on  paper.  
Doing so adds a measure of depth to the words, and having 
it  prominently  displayed  during  game  sessions  serves  to  
remind everyone that the characters have bound themselves 
together for a purpose.
    Not only does having a charter enhance roleplaying and 
deepen players’ and characters’ commitment to the party, but 
it also carries other benefi  ts. Your group gains a reputation as 
a unit within the campaign world, which can make it easier 
to access services and even gain credit with merchants. Later 
in the campaign, when characters fall in combat or retire, 
it’s easy to explain where replacements come from, since 
word of your group’s heroics will have spread throughout 
the lands. Eventually, your party could even gain the same 
kind of prominence and notoriety that the Harpers enjoy in 
the F
ORGOT TEN REALMS setting.
CHILDHOOD FRIENDSHIP
Your group has been together since childhood. Perhaps 
the characters’ parents, once adventurers themselves, were 
in the habit of entertaining their offspring with tales of 
fierce dragons, terrible sorcery, and vicious monsters. In 
such a situation, it would be only natural for the youngsters 
to follow in their parents’ footsteps upon coming of age, 
and perhaps even try to surpass the achievements of their 
heroic forebears.
    This background works especially well for a party whose 
members all belong to the same race, such as a group consist-
ing solely of dwar ves, elves, or hal fl  ings. Such a shared racial 
heritage can add yet another interesting dimension to your 
games. For instance, suppose you and the other players jointly 
decide  that  your  dwarf  characters  all  came  from  the  same  
stronghold. Life changed for all of you when a horde of mind 
fl  ayers and their minions boiled up out of the underground 
and overwhelmed your settlement. The dwarves who were not 
slain outright were enslaved and taken back to the cyclopean 
Four young dwarves vow vengeance against those who destroyed their stronghold
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel
620_95374_Ch6.indd   148620_95374_Ch6.indd   1482/8/06   4:10:43 PM2/8/06   4:10:43 PM

149
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
depths of the mind fl ayer city, never to be seen again. Now 
your group, which was away on another mission at the time 
of the illithid attack, is all that’s left of the clan. All the 
characters have taken a joint vow of vengeance against the 
denizens of the subterranean realm, and their goal is to free 
their enslaved people and restore the clan.
     A group need not be racially homogeneous to have a shared 
childhood. Half-orcs, half-elves, humans, and halfl  ings  all  
reach maturity at around the same time, and dwarves and 
gnomes do so about 20 years later. Thus, the characters could 
easi ly have met as adolescents —perhaps when they al l at tended 
the same academy or neighboring institutions. Once all the 
characters graduated, they decided to stick together and strike 
out for a l i fe of advent ure. Characters in this model might be 
siblings, old fl  ames, rivals, or just close friends.
CHOSEN
A popular motif for long-running campaigns is the concept of 
a shared destiny. Fate has decreed that one or more characters 
shall be in a certain place at a certain time, either to perform 
some great deed or to overcome a par ticularly nast y opponent. 
Perhaps the group’s paladin has been chosen to wrest the rod 
of Orcus from the demon pr ince’s grasp, or to save the Bastion 
of Souls. Or maybe the group as a whole will one day save the 
country, continent, or world from some terrible nemesis.
    While the characters who are actually saddled with such 
a destiny are undoubtedly the center of the group, the other 
PCs play an equally important role—namely, ensuring that 
the  prophesied  event  happens  as  it  should.  Without  their  
assistance, the fated characters cannot hope to accomplish 
the task set before them. Alternatively, the characters might 
know that one of their number has been chosen to perform a 
given task, but not who it is. This arrangement ensures that 
the characters are motivated to work together while each one 
dreams that he w i l l be the l i nchpi n of some g reat f ut ure event. 
And even if the DM has already decided who should be the 
Chosen One, he can still change his mind if that character 
dies, or the player leaves the group.
     Perhaps the ideal situation, though, is for fate to choose the 
entire party for the task. In this model, the avatar of a deity (or 
a powerful mage, noble, or prophet) hand-picks the characters 
and sets them on the path to greatness. The great and noble 
cause they champion (or the unbearable burden they bear) 
unites the party members and encourages them to believe that 
all must survive to fulfi  ll the prophecy. This commitment to one 
another’s survival in turn promotes party unity and teamwork, 
since each character must place a higher value on the lives and 
actions of his fellows than he otherwise would.
CIRCUMSTANCE
In some D&D campaigns, the adventuring party is formed 
when four heroes who have just met in a bar are hired for a 
dangerous mission by a shadowy individual in the corner. 
While this background is certainly the easiest to concoct, it 
does little to encourage teamwork and party unity. In fact, 
such a model relies on the relationships between players to 
keep the group together rather than those that evolve naturally 
among the characters.
     Nevertheless, you can still use circumstance to advantage 
when building an adventuring party. The characters might 
be escaped slaves or fugitives who fi  nd a common purpose 
in escaping a shared enemy. Or a terrible calamity could 
befall the environment, and the characters could emerge 
as champions of the affected people. Or perhaps a band of 
reavers is plundering and destroying every settlement they 
come across, and the characters must band together to combat 
the common enemy.
     A circumstance background relies heavily on the DM’s inter-
vention, since he must provide the catalyst that brings the group 
together. For example, the DM might open the campaign on a 
gruesome battlefi eld and reveal that the PCs are all survivors 
from the same squad. They knew l it tle about one another before 
the battle; they were simply thrown into the same unit because 
of the way the orders fell. Alternatively, the DM might rule that 
the characters are all from the same region, but they hail from 
widely separated villages. After a plague swept through the 
land and emptied several communities, the survivors grouped 
together to seek a way to rebuild.
ORGANIZATION
One  of  the  simplest  methods  for  building  an  adventuring  
party is to base it on membership in the same organization. 
Characters who are loyal to a guild, order, or some other group 
should extend that loyalty to other members as a matter of 
course. For example, the Order of Illumination (see Complete 
Adventurer, page 179) exists to root out evil wherever it lurks 
and confront it directly. Since membership is open only to 
those who are pure of heart, the players are automatically 
encouraged to create characters of similar alignments.
    While working on behalf of such an organization, the 
party is unlikely to run out of missions to perform. The 
characters  receive  their  orders  from  the  organization’s  
leaders, and they gain experience points and treasure with 
every job they perform. In time, the characters can move 
up through the ranks of the organization, and perhaps one 
day even lead it.
     The  primary  drawback  to  this  model  is  the  potential  
diffi culty of getting everyone to agree on the organization. 
Some organizations are class-based or have strict membership 
requirements  that  might  prevent  certain  characters  from  
joining. But if everyone in your group likes this approach, 
have each player state his character interests fi  rst,  then  select  
an organization together, with the DM’s assistance.
BUILDING THE PART Y
Choosing a background is just the fi rst step in building a 
party. Ideally, an adventuring party should include a good 
mixture of classes and races, since each brings a particular set 
of useful abilities to the table. Abilities that no one else has not 
only make a character unique, but they also allow her a chance 
in the spotlight on a regular basis. When characters’ abilities 
overlap, the chance for individuals to shine diminishes, and 
the party’s ability to handle new threats lessens.
     This section presents advice for working with your fellow 
players to build an effective adventuring party.
620_95374_Ch6.indd   149620_95374_Ch6.indd   1492/8/06   4:10:53 PM2/8/06   4:10:53 PM

150
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
ADVENTURING PARTY BASICS
A typical adventuring party consists of four characters, each 
representing one of the iconic elements of fantasy roleplay-
ing. The fi  ghter, the wizard, the cleric, and the rogue form 
the classic group. The fi  ghter relies on weapons to mete out 
damage and wears armor to avoid injury. The wizard uses 
spells to destroy enemies and to circumvent hazards. The 
cleric supports the other characters through healing spells 
and “buff ” spells that enhance abilities, though he can also 
aid the fi  ghter in combat. The rogue bypasses traps, assists 
the fi  ghter and cleric on the battlefi  eld, and br ings to bear an 
impressive skill set that makes her the party’s “go-to” person 
in just about any situation.
     The D&D game offers many other classes, but the rest are 
variations on these core themes. The druid shares many of 
the cleric’s spells but also has specialized abilities that allow 
her  to  thrive  in  wilderness  environments.  The  ranger,  an  
amalgam of both the druid and the fi  ghter classes, has some 
of  the  druid’s  abilities  plus  bonus  feats  based  on  a  chosen  
combat style. In like manner, the paladin blends the abilities 
of the cleric with those of the fi  ghter. The monk is a fi ghting 
character who eschews armor to gain more mobility on the 
battlefi eld, and the bard blends the skills of the rogue with 
a smat ter ing of magic from multiple classes. In shor t, al most 
every  other  class  beyond  the  basic  four  is  a  combination,  
variation, or extension of the four basic themes.
     Consider carefully how your character choice will interact 
with those of your fellow players in an adventuring party. If 
two people want to play rogues, and your group has only four 
players, the party might have to do without one of the four 
key elements unless someone else chooses a character whose 
abilities cover the missing theme. Even choosing characters 
similar to those in the ideal party can create problems. For 
example, choosing a druid or a paladin in place of a cleric, or 
a bard instead of a rogue can produce severe consequences 
for a party that cannot fi  ll the gaps in expertise. The same 
problem exists with the new standard classes presented in 
recent publications. What must the other characters do to 
compensate when a party includes a warlock instead of a 
wizard, for instance?
     Proper  character  class  selection  is  vital  to  the  long-term  
success of an adventuring party. The choices you make when 
building your team determine the group’s ability to face off 
against the denizens of the dungeon as well as the horrors 
of the wilds. The following sections examine the four basic 
character  roles—warrior,  expert,  arcane  spellcaster,  and  
divine spellcaster—as well as the implications of alternative 
class choices. Each section also provides some advice on how 
to compensate for deviations from the four iconic classes.
Warriors
The popularity of fi  ghting characters is largely attributable to 
ease of play and overall satisfaction. The fi  ghter’s broad selec-
tion of feats, the ranger’s array of abilities, the barbarian’s raw 
destructive power, and the leadership potential of the paladin 
all offer exciting options for adventuring. Perhaps the biggest 
appeal of these classes, however, is that their pr imar y abil ities 
are never tapped out—they can always kill monsters.
     As a warrior, your job is to stall the opponents with melee 
or ranged attacks long enough for the other party members 
to bring their special abilities to bear. You buy time for the 
arcane spellcaster to destroy the monster with a spell, or the 
cleric  to  turn  the  undead,  or  the  rogue  to  eliminate  tough  
opponents  with  sneak  attacks.  And  if  you  happen  to  kill  a  
bunch of goblins along the way, so much the better. When 
playing a warrior, it pays to think both offensively and defen-
sively. You are consistently the heaviest hitter in the group, 
and you never run out of swings. However, you should also 
try to preserve yourself, since you are the last line of defense 
before the monsters reach the wizard and the cleric.
     Fighter:     The  backbone  of  any  adventuring  group,  the  
fi  ghter is versatile, potent, and highly customizable because 
he can branch out into several feat trees that hone his skills 
in both melee and ranged combat. However, the best fi  ghters  
are those whose abilities are broad enough to give them an 
edge over any kind of foe. Thus, when playing a fi  ghter,  you  
should resist the temptation to specialize in one feat path too 
exclusively. If possible, keep your ranged combat prowess as 
strong as your melee ability so that you can take on fl  iers  and  
ground forces with equal profi  ciency.
    Barbarian: A barbarian is primarily a melee combatant. 
His rage ability augments his Strength and Constitution—
the two characteristics that are most valuable in face-to-face 
fi  ghting. But the fact that Survival and Listen are among his 
class skills also makes him a great (albeit reckless) scout.
     Unlike the fi  ghter, the barbarian has only enough feat choices 
to develop one or maybe two feat paths. So if your barbarian is 
the party’s primary melee warrior, the burden of ranged attack 
support falls on the party’s spellcasters and experts. Thus, the 
arcane spellcasters should emphasize ranged spells that deal 
hit point damage. The party’s experts also need to focus on 
developing  their  ranged  attack  prowess—particularly  the  
rogue’s ability to launch sneak attacks against targets up to 
30 feet away.
     Monk: Another great warrior choice, the monk is excellent 
at slipping past the ranks of lesser foes to focus her attacks on 
the leaders. Her great saving throws, evasion, and resistance 
to mind-affecting spells and abilities make her far and away 
the best warrior to throw at enemy spellcasters. But although 
she is never unarmed, the monk lacks the damage potential 
of fi  ghters and barbarians, who can bring heavy weapons to 
bear  against  a  foe.  Furthermore,  the  monk  must  focus  her  
feat  selections  on  improving  her  Armor  Class  because  she  
loses her best abilities if she wears armor.
    If you’re playing a monk as your party’s lead warrior, the 
cler ic must assume the role of heav y hit ter in melee. Develop -
ing the Power Attack feat path can help a cleric in such a party 
dish out more damage than he otherwise could. The party’s 
arcane spellcasters tend to fall back into a supporting role, 
using their spells to augment the team members’ individual 
abilities, though they can fi  re  off  their  deadly  area  spells  
without much worry of damaging you. Experts, who are often 
just as mobile as you are, can work with you to fl  ank  enemies  
and eliminate them quickly and effi  ciently.
    Ranger: The ranger is a great character choice for nearly 
any adventuring party. Armed with spells, a few bonus feats, 
620_95374_Ch6.indd   150620_95374_Ch6.indd   1502/8/06   4:11:00 PM2/8/06   4:11:00 PM

151
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
and great class features, the ranger can also work to improve 
his combat prowess against specifi  c types of foes. However, 
he  lacks  the  versatility  of  the  standard  fi  ghter  because  he  
must focus on a single combat style. If you follow the archery 
combat path, the party’s expert should support the cleric’s 
necessarily broader role as a melee combatant. Conversely, if 
you follow the two-weapon path, both the arcane spellcaster 
and the expert need to build up their ranged arsenals.
    In either case, the divine spellcaster must also support 
the ranger with buff spells (such as cat’s grace and magic vest-
ment) and keep plenty of spell slots available for cure spells 
to keep him on his feet. If possible, the arcane spellcaster in 
your party should summon additional monsters to distract 
enemies and spread damage around.
     Don’t neglect your ranger’s Armor Class in your feat selec-
tion. When it’s time to choose favored enemies, select the 
foes that your par t y is most l i kely to encounter and avoid the 
esoteric and unusual monsters that other team members can 
handle more effi  ciently.
     Paladin:     This  virtuous  knight  not  only  makes  a  great  
spokesperson for the party, but she also serves as a support 
system for the cleric. The healing that the paladin can provide 
through her lay on hands ability leaves the cleric with more 
prepared spells that need not be converted to cure spells. 
Though a paladin isn’t quite the equivalent of a fi  ghter in terms 
of combat prowess, she more than ma kes up for this lack w ith 
turning abilities, a special mount, and the ability to smite evil. 
Like  the  barbarian,  though,  the  paladin  is  starved  for  feats,  
so she can focus on only one or two feat paths. Most paladins 
choose to develop the Mounted Combat path, which tends to 
reduce their effectiveness in certain common environments 
such as dungeons.
     When you introduce a paladin into an adventuring party, 
the rest of the characters have to respect her code of conduct 
and  alignment  restrictions.  The  cleric  and  the  rogue  must  
play larger roles in combat—the former supplementing the 
paladin in melee and the latter offering ranged support. Also, 
the wizard should emphasize combat spells to make up for 
the lack of a reliable ranged attacker.
    Other    Classes: Complete Warrior offers three new warrior 
standard classes: the hexblade, the samurai, and the swash-
buckler. All three of these are good choices, but each brings 
its own advantages and disadvantages to the group.
     The hexblade gains a spell progression starting at 4th level, 
and he has a number of interesting abilities with which he 
can disrupt his opponents. However, he lacks the fi ghter’s 
bonus feats, so he pretty much has to specialize in one 
combat technique.
     The samurai is similar to the ranger in that his class features 
emphasize a particular style of fi  ghting—a  two-weapon  style,  
in this case. But the samurai makes a poor ranged attacker, 
and his class features focus on fear effects, which are useful 
only against susceptible opponents.
    The swashbuckler makes a great fi ghting companion for 
the rogue, but her Armor Class is low compared to most 
fighting characters, so she must use feats or other assets 
to compensate for it. Thus, she’s unlikely to be the party’s 
principal damage-dealer.
Warrior types let it all hang out in combat
Illus. by J. Nelson
620_95374_Ch6.indd   151620_95374_Ch6.indd   1512/8/06   4:11:07 PM2/8/06   4:11:07 PM

Adventure awaits just over that hill
620_95374_Ch6.indd   152620_95374_Ch6.indd   1522/8/06   4:11:17 PM2/8/06   4:11:17 PM

153
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
Experts
An expert is a character who brings a broad skill selection 
and useful combat abilities to the table. The rogue is perhaps 
the best example of this category. Experts are invaluable 
members of any group because they can fi  ll a variety of roles, 
from backup spellcaster to extra warrior.
     When playing an expert, you depend heavily on your skills 
and class features. You have more skill points than any other 
character in the group, and you can generally get into and 
out of scrapes with a good skill check result.
    Rogue:    The rogue class offers three key advantages: sneak 
attacks, an excellent selection of class skills, and trapfi  nding.  
The sneak attack ability allows the rogue to support the 
party’s key warrior by taking advantage of fl  anking  oppor-
tunities and surprise attacks. The rogue’s skill in breaking 
and entering allow the party to overcome obstacles such as 
locked doors and deadly traps. In addition, the rogue often 
scouts ahead to gain information about enemies. While the 
ranger, who sometimes serves as a rogue substitute, has a 
broad selection of skills and plenty of skill points to back 
them up, his talents make him more useful in wilderness 
environments than in dungeons, and he can’t help his party 
bypass traps. On the other hand, he is more of a warrior than 
the rogue is, so he can hold his own next to fi  ghters,  paladins,  
and barbarians.
     As a rogue, you are expected to fi  ll in where needed. Don’t 
ignore the Use Magic Device skill; it allows you to use a wand 
of cure light wounds to get the cleric back on his feet should 
he become disabled. Likewise, your ability to use a wand of 
magic missile, or even read a scroll, can make all the difference 
in combat. And perhaps most important, your sneak attack 
ability can help the party’s main warrior bring down the 
tough opponents.
     Bard:     Heralded as the best fi  fth character in any adventur-
ing party, the bard is the most often overlooked expert. The 
bard’s best feature is his adaptability—he is a warrior, an 
expert, an arcane spellcaster, and a divine spellcaster rolled 
into one. Like the rogue, he has plenty of skill points and 
a wide selection of class skills. But while the rogue’s class 
skills focus on scouting, sneaking, and subterfuge, the bard’s 
allow him to play a strong role in supporting the other 
party members.
     When you play a bard, you don’t have the rogue’s trapfi  nd-
ing ability, so the cleric must cover this aspect of the expert 
with his fi  n d   t r a p s  spell—though  you  can  help  if  you  have  
the inspire competence ability. Likewise, you can use inspire 
greatness and inspire heroics to improve a warrior’s combat 
abilities at higher levels. Furthermore, since you have access 
to spells, you can supplement both arcane and divine spell-
casters,  expanding  the  party’s  ability  to  circumvent  minor  
threats and letting the more potent spellcasters reserve their 
spell slots for handling the really deadly enemies.
    Other    Classes:    Complete Adventurer presents three new 
expert standard classes: the ninja, the scout, and the spell-
thief. All three have the trapfinding ability, plus special 
abilities such as sudden strike (which is similar to sneak 
attack) and great skill selections. Thus, playing one of these 
classes is just as good as having a rogue in the party.
Arcane Spellcasters
Wizards, sorcerers, and their ilk develop powerful spells in 
lieu of combat abilities. In fact, since they have the smallest 
Hit Die type of all the classes (d4 in most cases), they are more 
of a liability in melee than an asset. However, they make up 
for their poor combat skills with access to some of the most 
potent spells in the game.
     As an arcane spel lcaster, you must circumvent the gravest 
threats to the party. You can lob fi reballs and lightning bolts at 
the party’s opponents, conjure up terrible servants, and even 
transport your allies past obstructions and obstacles. Playing 
the party’s arcane spellcaster is a big responsibility, but it can 
be both memorable and highly rewarding as well.
    Wizard:    The wizard’s strength lies in the depth of her 
knowledge and her ability to cast a variety of different spells. 
In addition, she can modify those spells with metamagic 
feats and use them to create magic items that benefi  t  not  only  
herself but also the rest of the party.
     Deciding which spells to prepare on a given day, however, 
requires a bit of strategy. A poorly prepared wizard all too 
often becomes meat for monsters. For instance, a 5th-level 
wizard who prepares lightning bolt before facing a creature 
that is immune to electricity now might lack access to a spell 
that could have overcome the opponent.
     When you play an arcane spellcaster, resist the urge to pre-
pare all offensive spells. A charm person spell can accomplish 
a lot more than a magic missile at times, and you shouldn’t 
underestimate its value. By preparing a good mix of spells, 
you can be useful in situations ranging from diplomacy to 
divination to war.
    Sorcerer:    The sorcerer makes an excellent substitute for 
the wizard in an adventuring party. Although the number of 
different spells he can access is relatively small, he outstrips 
a wizard of equivalent level in the number of spells he can 
cast per day. If he chooses to special ize in of fensive spel ls, he 
can be a formidable combat caster. However, most sorcerers 
can do little to supply their companions with magic items, 
and they typically don’t have the same range of skills as their 
more learned counterparts. Worse still, using metamagic feats 
slows the sorcerer’s casting time, turning this key spellcasting 
tool into a potential liability.
     If your sorcerer is the par t y’s key arcane spel lcaster, it ’s best to 
focus on total offense. Let the cleric erect the magical defenses 
and the warrior block the hits. Your task is to bombard your 
enemies with a barrage of damaging spells. Make sure you learn 
spells  of  every  energy  type  and  take  the  Spell  Penetration  
feat early to help you overcome spell resistance.
    Other    Classes: Complete Arcane presents three new arcane 
spellcasting classes: the warlock, the wu-jen, and the war-
mage. Each of these classes is a variation on the core arcane 
theme—one restricts the spell selection, another changes 
the fundamental methods of casting, and the third exchanges 
certain spellcasting elements for others. The warlock is a 
great alternative to the combat-oriented sorcerer, and he can 
offer ranged combat potential in a party with warriors who 
specialize in melee. On the other hand, if the group’s warrior 
is an effective ranged combatant, the warmage can help the 
cleric and rogue cover the group’s melee needs.
Illus. by M. Komarck
620_95374_Ch6.indd   153620_95374_Ch6.indd   1532/8/06   4:11:27 PM2/8/06   4:11:27 PM

154
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
Divine Spellcasters
The divine spellcaster is the heart and soul of every adventur-
ing party. Armed with good combat prowess, a broad range 
of buff spells, power over undead, and the always-in-demand 
cure spells, the cleric fi  lls a vital role. In fact, a party without 
a cleric has a much harder time surviving than one that has 
clerical support from the start.
     When you choose a div ine spel lcaster, you play an impor tant 
suppor t role in your par t y. You’re the one ever yone else rel ies on 
to supply healing spells, remove affl  ictions such as diseases and 
curses, and restore lost ability points. You can also bring extra 
support to the team with your summon monster, summon nature’s 
ally, or planar ally spells. The more combatants you have on your 
side, the less damage your fellow characters have to take.
 Cleric: The cleric is undoubtedly among the most effective 
characters in the game. With the right spells, he can rival even 
warriors in combat, and no character is more effective against 
undead. When you add unique domain abilities and the abil-
ity to heal others spontaneously, the cleric easily becomes 
one of the most important characters in the party.
     Even so, playing a cleric can sometimes seem like a chore. 
Because your companions look to you to fi  x all their troubles, 
you might feel more like the party fi  rst-aid kit than a full-
fl  edged member of the group. While it’s true that no party 
would last long without your cures, you’re far more than a 
simple healing factory. Your ability to fi  ght and cast potent 
spel ls coupled w ith your access to abi l ities that no other char-
acter has ensure that you remain among the more powerful 
characters in the game.
    Druid:    The  druid  is  a  viable  substitute  for  the  cleric.  
While the druid lacks spontaneous healing ability, she can 
spontaneously summon creatures instead. Add the ability to 
change shape and a potent spell list that retains most of the 
cure spells, and the druid becomes an important addition to 
any adventuring party.
    If you’re playing a druid, you’re more than likely the only 
character in the party with any ability to cast cure spells—
unless your group also includes a bard or a higher-level paladin. 
So it pays to invest in disposable magic items such as wands 
of cure light wounds or wands of cure moderate wounds to free up 
your spell slots for more interesting spells. Don’t be afraid to 
experiment with your spell selection; in a worst-case scenario, 
you can lose a prepared spell to cast a summon nature’s ally spell 
of the same level.
    Other    Classes:    Complete  Divine  offers  three  additional  
divine spellcasting classes: the favored soul, the shugenja, and 
the spirit shaman. Each brings a specialized set of abilities 
to the table, as well as a few disadvantages. The favored soul 
offers better combat potential, the shugenja a broader access 
to  different  kinds  of  spells,  and  the  spirit  shaman  a  set  of  
unique abilities effective against specifi  c kinds of creatures. 
All three however, cast spells like a sorcerer, so none has the 
same spell versatility as the cleric.
Missing Elements
Sometimes no one in the group wants to play a particular 
role, or the players don’t want to be constrained by the four 
classic character roles. And some groups have only two or 
three players—none of whom might be interested in playing 
multiple characters.
     While the absence of any one of the four classic character 
roles makes adventuring more diffi cult, it does not make it 
impossible.  Individual  characters  can  make  extensive  use  
of  the  multiclassing  rules,  invest  in  the  Leadership  feat  to  
pick up cohorts, or even play two or more characters if the 
DM allows it. But when a party is just plain missing a crucial 
element, you can take a few specifi  c actions to minimize the 
impact of that shortfall.
    Missing    Warrior: For most groups, the very idea of not 
having a front-line fi  ghter is appalling. Yet this role is in some 
ways the most disposable. Clerics and druids are competent 
warriors  in  their  own  right,  and  with  the  right  set  of  buff  
spells (such as bull’s strength, magic weapon, and the like), they 
can be the equals of nearly any warrior-type character.
     If your group lacks a warrior, consider adding a druid, whose 
wild shape ability and animal companion can make up for the 
missing component. A bard can also be an excellent choice, 
since the additional healing he can supply lets the cleric devote 
his spells to augmenting his own fi  ghting abilities. The scout 
class from Complete Adventurer is another great choice. With 
ranger Hit Dice and the sudden strike ability, the scout not 
only has combat abilities that rival those of warriors, but she 
can also support the rogue as a secondary trap fi  nder.
     Ideal Four-Character Group: Cleric, druid, rogue, and sorcerer.
    Ideal Three-Character Group: Cleric, rogue, and sorcerer.
    Missing    Expert: Not having an expert can make certain 
environments tricky—if not downright deadly. The lack of a 
character who can identify and disable traps means the party 
is at risk of springing nearly every trap in the dungeon.
     When a party fi  nds itself in this situation, it’s up to the cleric 
to compensate. The Trickery domain offers some stealth skills 
and spells, and the fi  n d   t r a p s spell—though its use depletes 
the cleric’s available spell slots—can make up for the missing 
rogue ability. A group that’s missing a rogue can also consider 
fi  lling the warrior’s role with the paladin, since that class can 
help the cleric compensate for his expanded role. A ranger is 
also a good choice because he offers the party scouting abilities 
that would otherwise be lacking.
     Ideal  Four-Character  Group:  Cleric,  paladin,  ranger,  and  
wizard.
    Ideal Three-Character Group: Cleric, ranger, and wizard.
    Missing  Arcane  Spellcaster: The lack of an arcane 
spellcaster can spell disaster for a party. Wizards and sorcer-
ers  provide  the  means  to  eliminate  large  numbers  of  foes,  
clearing the way for the principal warrior to hammer away 
at the key opponent. The arcane spellcaster also signifi cantly 
improves a party’s chances of overcoming particularly nasty 
opponents, such as dragons and magical beasts.
    While having an arcane spellcaster is certainly preferable, a 
party can compensate for the lack of one. The best way is for the 
expert to keep pumping skill points into the Use Magic Device 
skill so that she can use items to produce the necessary magi-
cal effects. A bard, who can provide a small amount of arcane 
magic, is also extremely useful, as is an extra cleric, who can at 
least provide some damage-dealing divine magic. The hexblade, 
from Complete Warrior, makes a good backup as well.
620_95374_Ch6.indd   154620_95374_Ch6.indd   1542/8/06   4:11:35 PM2/8/06   4:11:35 PM

155
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
     Ideal Four-Character Group: Bard, cleric, fi  ghter, and rogue.
    Ideal Three-Character Group: Bard, cleric, and fi  ghter.
     Missing Divine Spellcaster: The divine spellcaster is the 
element most commonly missing from a party. Many players 
prefer to go for the spotlight with a fi  ghter or wizard (or the 
equivalent) rather than playing what they see as a supporting 
character. But the lack of a divine spellcaster results in a consid-
erable drain on party resources. Parties that lack this element 
soon discover that they must invest in multiple wands of cure 
light wounds just to compensate for the healing a cleric could 
have provided—fi  fty charges don’t last as long as one might 
think. This healing defi cit plus the loss of turning capabil-
ity and the lack of strong divination spells (such as augury 
and divination) makes operating without a divine spellcaster 
quite expensive and more than a little dangerous. Still, a party 
that’s missing this element can compensate with the bard and 
paladin classes, both of which have some healing abilities. 
The party rogue should maximize her ranks in Use Magic 
Device so that she can activate divine scrolls and wands.
     Ideal Four-Character Group: Bard, paladin, rogue, and wizard.
    Ideal Three-Character Group: Paladin, rogue, and wizard.
The Fifth Character
Groups with more than four players offer greater fl  exibility  
in  class  choices.  The  party  doesn’t  suffer  from  having  two  
wizards or two fi  ghters, but the roles of the duplicate charac-
ters overlap, reducing the enjoyment for the two players who 
must share the spotlight. The best way to prevent role overlap 
is for players to branch out into different aspects of the same 
roles. Instead of two fi ghters, for example, consider a ranger 
or a barbarian for the second warrior. The ranger can provide 
the  ranged  attacks  (assuming  he  has  selected  the  archery  
combat style), while the barbarian serves as the melee menace. 
Likewise, instead of two wizards, try a wizard coupled with 
a bard or sorcerer. The wizard retains a diverse selection of 
spells, while the other arcane spellcaster helps to fi  ll gaps in 
the party caused by casualties. The following sections offer 
recommendations for character choices in larger parties.
     Two      Wa r r ior s : Part of what makes the fi  ghter a great class 
choice is his ability to develop several different combat tech-
niques. When the party has the luxury of an extra warrior, both 
players have more fl exibility, since they can take advantage of 
alternative techniques without diminishing the overall effective-
ness of the party. For instance, a monk and a barbarian, though 
opposite in outlook, make a great team. They both move faster 
than normal for their races, so they can close with the enemy and 
reduce the need for warriors who specialize in ranged attacks. 
Likewise, a barbarian can handle melee combat with ease, while 
the second warrior, preferably a fi  ghter or a ranger, can supply 
covering fi  re with a bow or crossbow, eliminating additional 
targets  that  are  closing  in  on  the  barbarian.  Substituting  a  
paladin for a barbarian can give the same results, especially 
in a campaign that features undead, demons, or some equally 
evil nemesis as the dominant monster type.
     Two      E x p e r t s : At fi rst glance, two rogues in a party looks 
like a winning combination, and in many ways it is. Multiple 
rogues can work together to fl  ank enemies and dish out buckets 
of sneak attack damage. If they have ranks in Tumble, they can 
weave through their enemies and select the best targets for their 
attacks, while also supporting the party’s primary warrior.
     On the other hand, two rogues also overlap a great deal. The 
party really doesn’t need more than one character to fi  nd  traps,  
pick locks, and translate musty inscriptions on the wall. If the 
group does have a second translator, it’s typically the wizard.
 To prevent this kind of overlap, one of the players should 
consider  playing  a  bard.  Easily  the  most  versatile  kind  of  
character, the bard offers a mix of abilities from all classes, 
including combat prowess, solid saving throws, and spellcast-
ing ability. Better still, bardic music helps everyone, providing 
bonuses on certain tasks or in the heat of combat.
 Other experts, such as the ninja and the scout, can help the 
rogue concentrate on developing the right skills and abilities 
to eliminate traps. Because these other characters are more 
combat-oriented,  they  excel  at  maneuvering  through  the  
battlefi  eld to help the rogue fl  ank enemies for sneak attacks, 
as well as to support the other warriors.
     Two      A r c a ne      Sp e l l c a s te r s : Two wizards in the same party 
can effectively double the number of spells they ordinarily 
would have by sharing their spellbooks. And in heated combat, 
two fi reballs from allied wizards are always better than one.
    However, a better tactic for individualizing party roles is 
for one player to select a sorcerer. If that character focuses 
on  combat  spells,  the  wizard  can  take  charge  of  the  more  
utilitarian spells.
 Multiple  arcane  spellcasters  can  help  the  party  in  other  
ways as well. If the party’s primary warrior is not a fi  ghter,  a  
warmage can provide some great offensive spells, as well as 
some combat ability to shore up any shortcomings. A bard 
is also a great choice, since an extra character with access to 
healing spells is never bad.
     Two  D iv i ne  Sp e l l c a s te r s : Clerics are probably the best of 
all the classes to duplicate in a party. Sharing the burden of 
keeping the warrior on his feet gives each cleric more freedom 
to cast other spells. Multiple clerics can provide buff spells, 
such as bull’s strength and bear’s endurance, to boost the front line, 
as well as eagle’s splendor to help the sorcerer cast more power ful 
combat spells. Magic vestment, magic weapon, aid, bless, and others 
used in combination can give the whole party a boost. If the 
primary cleric can do more than just function as the party’s 
medic, his player is likely to enjoy the session more.
 A druid is also a good addition to an adventuring party as a 
second divine caster. The druid’s special abilities (wild shape 
and  spontaneous  casting  of  summon  nature’s  ally)  can  add  
considerable power to the group. Furthermore, the druid has a 
useful selection of wilderness survival spells, and her animal 
companion can help other characters fl  ank  enemies.
     Psionics: If your campaign includes psionics, the classes 
presented in Expanded Psionics Handbook offer the chance to play 
a unique and exotic character. A psychic warrior or soulknife 
works well as a secondary warrior, and psions and wilders are 
good replacements for arcane spellcasters.
BEING A TEAM PLAYER
Developing a shared background and carefully planning the 
group’s character choices has little effect if the group doesn’t 
act as a team. The story of one brave, bold hero overcoming 
620_95374_Ch6.indd   155620_95374_Ch6.indd   1552/8/06   4:11:42 PM2/8/06   4:11:42 PM

156
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
adversity is fi  ne for a fantasy novel, but what makes the D&D 
game great is the teamwork displayed by a group of such 
adventurers. Selfi  sh thoughts and actions are the best way 
for your party to meet a terrible end. If your rogue sneaks 
off to claim the choicest bits of treasure before the rest of 
the group can arrive, the fi ghter might not have the right 
tool to defeat the next monster, and another ally might not 
have the right item to save your hide. And you aren’t doing 
your companions any favors by pushing ahead to fi  ght  the  
next  monster  in  the  next  room,  because  if  you  die,  their  
chances for survival diminish considerably. Furthermore, 
a  cleric  who  hoards  his  cure  spells  until  someone  is  at  
death’s door encourages his companions not to take risks 
and not to perform heroic acts, thereby reducing the fun 
for everyone involved.
     Though roleplaying games technically do not have winners 
or losers, adventuring parties do—at least in a sense. Your team 
wins by achieving its objectives. If your party saves the town 
or clears the dungeon, all its members win. Therefore, in the 
most important sense, you win by working together.
Thinking as a Group
All encounter levels (ELs) are approximations based on a group 
of four reasonably healthy characters of the appropriate level. 
Thus,  an  EL  4  encounter  is  appropriate  for  a  group  of  four  
4th-level  characters.  If  one  or  two  of  those  characters  dies,  
the encounter becomes more diffi cult. Thus, acting without 
regard for your companions is a surefi  re way to force everyone 
to make a new character and start over. So when working in a 
group, keep the following three points in mind.
     First, your character is an integral par t of the group, whether 
or not that fact is apparent to you. Every class and race provides 
a set of options and abilities that can help a party overcome 
an encounter. And even if you don’t know what to do in a 
given round, you can always use the aid another action to 
help someone else.
     Second, the party is always more important than the individual 
character. Always be aware of your comrades’ positions and their 
ability to handle a particular threat. If the wizard is desperately 
battling fi  ve goblins, and you’re playing the fi  ghter, you’d better 
get over there and save the spellcaster’s skin. Likewise, if you’re 
playing the cleric, your primary job is to help the warriors stay 
on their feet, though you can also lend combat or spell support 
as necessary. So if the heavy hitter is disabled, cure him as fast as 
possible so he can continue to do his job. By staying cognizant 
of the battlefi  eld and your fellow party members, you should be 
able to handle just about anything the DM throws at you.
    Third, keep in mind that characters who hate each other 
don’t generally work together for long. If your group includes 
a paladin, it’s probably not a good idea to play a chaotic evil 
half-orc  necromancer.  Such  contrasts,  while  they  provide  
excellent opportunities for roleplaying, are never conducive 
Hennet serves as party cartographer
Illus. by S. Ellis
620_95374_Ch6.indd   156620_95374_Ch6.indd   1562/8/06   4:11:49 PM2/8/06   4:11:49 PM

157
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
to a good gaming experience. Playing a treacherous character 
diminishes or destroys the tr ust that is v ital to par t y cohesive-
ness, and when you brave the depths of the underground, you 
want your friends to watch your back.
Team Roles
We l l - d e fi  ned party roles can help keep your group focused 
on teamwork. Each role represents a responsibility for a char-
acter, and the different roles ensure that each player has an 
opportunity to shine and gets a voice in the decision-making 
processes. Furthermore, team roles keep disagreements to a 
minimum and focus attention on the fun parts of gaming. 
The following sections provide some example roles other 
than the iconic ones discussed above.
    Cartographer/Historian: The party cartographer is 
responsible for mapping, taking notes about certain rooms, 
and recording puzzles, riddles, and campaign notes. Though 
ideally this function should be a shared responsibility, some 
players are better at it than others. If another player shoulders 
the burden of keeping notes, pitch in whenever you can by 
helping to recall certain details.
     Face: Your group should set tle on one person in the group 
to be the default “front man.” When your party needs a good 
negotiator to slip past some guards or to talk a dragon into 
letting everyone live, it falls to this character to do the con-
vincing. So don’t feel overshadowed when the “face” character 
speaks up; he’s just doing his part. After all, a character who’s 
good at talking is not always good at fi ghting.
    General:    A born strategist can look at the battle map, pick 
out the best paths for movement to avoid attacks of opportunity, 
place spells where they are most effective, and decide where 
everyone should be located to do well in combat situations. Such 
a player is an asset to the group because she can offer advice 
about where to attack, point out advantageous environmental 
conditions, and develop great strategies for the party. A general 
can also help other players make good combat decisions and 
show them how to maximize their resources in a fi  ght.
     Few people enjoy being bossed around, and a demanding 
player—even a well-intentioned one—can ruin the fun 
for everyone. Thus, the general must be receptive to others’ 
opinions and sensitive to their feelings.
     Judge:     Inev itably, characters (and their players) come into 
confl ict during the game. The dispute might be about who 
gets a certain piece of treasure, or it might be a disagreement 
over a proposed course of action. When such a con fl  ict  occurs,  
it’s wise to put a time limit on the ensuing debate so that it 
cannot derai l the game session. Fur ther more, a disinterested 
character (or player) should listen to all sides of the argument 
and make a binding decision. This “judge” role can fall to dif-
ferent characters depending on who is involved in the debate, 
but someone who can make a quick decision and resolve the 
argument is invaluable for keeping the game on track.
    Scout: Forewar ned is forear med, so just about ever y par t y 
recognizes the need for a scout. Ideally, the scout should be 
able to move forward quietly, inspect the scene ahead, and 
report back quickly to his comrades. A character with high 
Hide and Move Silently modifi  ers  fi  ts this role perfectly, so 
it often falls to the rogue.
     The  party  scout  can  quickly  overshadow  the  rest  of  the  
group if too much of the action falls on his shoulders. Thus, 
scouts should reser ve their stealthy reconnaissance for when 
it’s necessary. If the scout insists on inspecting every room, 
the game can quickly become all about him, with the rest of 
the characters as supporting cast.
    Security: The character fi  lling this party role is in charge 
of  securing  the  area  before  the  PCs  enter  a  room  or  camp  
for  the  night.  She  might  do  a  quick  search  for  traps,  make  
Listen checks, or examine the fl  oor for recent tracks. She also 
determines the order of watches and is ultimately responsible 
for  keeping  the  party  safe  from  ambushes.  If  the  security  
person feels that a particular location or action is too risky, 
the rest of the party should fi  nd an alternative solution.
     Task     Leader:     Certain characters are just better at specifi  c  tasks  
than others. Thus, the character with the best Listen modifi  er  
should be listening at doors, not the fi  ghter in full plate with 
the Wisdom score of 6. By the same token, the character with 
the trapfi  nding ability should be the party’s authority on traps. 
Identify certain checks the group has to make frequently, and 
put the characters with the best modifi  ers in charge of them.
TEAMWORK BENEFITS
After  a  few  adventures,  the  characters  in  an  adventuring  
party tend to identify particular routines and tactics that 
work well for them. The wizard might select certain spells 
to complement the fi  ghter’s tactics, while the cleric and the 
rogue  fi  gure  out  where  to  stand  in  a  fi ght so that they can 
lend support while still allowing the fi  ghter to shield them 
from  the  worst  of  the  enemy  attacks.  In  this  manner,  the  
party  can  develop  concrete  teamwork  benefi  ts  that  evolve  
from the experience of working together.
WHAT IS A TEAMWORK BENEFIT?
Experienced players understand the value of specifi  c  tactics  
that depend on teamwork. However, teamwork also provides 
a  more  general  benefi t. Once characters have trained with 
specifi  c  comrades  for  a  time,  they  become  attuned  to  the  
nuances of how their companions fi  ght, move, and commu-
nicate. Thus, characters who have spent time working as a 
team can derive a benefi  t simply from having their comrades 
nearby.  This  teamwork  benefi  t  can  grant  an  expanded  use  
of a skill, a bonus on certain checks, or a battlefi  eld  action  
otherwise unavailable to the team members.
     To qualify for a teamwork benefi  t, PCs must meet two broad 
categories of requirements: training time and prerequisites.
     First, the characters must jointly practice techniques relevant 
to the desired benefi  t for at least two weeks before acquiring it. 
This training per iod must be repeated whenever a new character 
joins the group, so that the newcomer can become accustomed 
to the operating procedures of the veteran team members.
    Second, some teamwork benefi ts have prerequisites such 
as skill ranks, base attack bonus, or feats. A prerequisite can 
take one of two different forms.
 Task Leader Prerequisites: These requirements must be met 
by at least one character on the team. If the only character who 
qualifi  es leaves the team, the group loses the teamwork benefi  t  
620_95374_Ch6.indd   157620_95374_Ch6.indd   1572/8/06   4:11:59 PM2/8/06   4:11:59 PM

158
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
until that character returns or is replaced by another who meets 
the same prerequisites. Since prerequisites for teamwork benefi  ts  
vary widely, the character who assumes the task leader position 
might differ depending on the specifi  c  benefi  t.
     In addition to the indicated prerequisites, a task leader must 
have an Intel l igence score of at least 8. (Whi le he need not be a 
genius or have a strong personalit y, he must be at least reason-
ably capable of communicating his thoughts to others.)
 Team Member Prerequisites: Every character on the team 
must meet these requirements. Any new character who joins 
the team must also meet them, or the team can no longer enjoy 
the benefi  t.
     For example, the cunning ambush teamwork benefi  t  has  a  
task leader prerequisite of 8 ranks in both Hide and Listen, 
and a team member prerequisite of 1 rank in Hide. So, at 
least one character in the group must have 8 or more ranks 
in both Hide and Listen, and every other character on the 
team must have at least 1 rank in Hide. Thus, when the team 
is  sneaking  around,  the  task  leader  directs  her  less  adept  
comrades in stealth techniques, covers any extra noise with 
environmental sounds, and so on.
    A team (see The Team Roster, below) gets one teamwork 
benefi  t  for  every  4  Hit  Dice  the  lowest-level  member  of  
the team has. If that character’s level later drops below the 
required point (due to energy drain, for example), the team 
retains all its current teamwork benefi  ts but can’t gain a new 
one until that character regains his lost level(s), plus enough 
additional levels to qualify for an additional benefi t.
     Whenever a team gains a new teamwork benefit, it also 
has the option to swap out a benefit it previously had for a 
new one, as long as it meets the new prerequisites. In effect, 
the team can elect to lose one teamwork benefit to gain 
two others. Such swaps usually occur when the team roster 
has changed in such a way as to render a previously known 
teamwork benefi  t less useful than before.
    Unless other wise specifi  ed, each teamwork benefi  t can be 
taken only once. A teamwork benefi  t applies whenever the 
characters on the team can communicate with each other—be 
it verbally, through gestures, or by magical means.
THE TEAM ROSTER
Tea mwork b enefi  ts are based on the notion that once charac-
ters have spent time training with their comrades, they can 
respond instinctively to subtle changes in body language and 
anticipate their teammates’ likely moves. A group of PCs or 
NPCs must train together for at least two weeks before the 
group can gain any teamwork benefi  ts. The PCs will undoubt-
edly occupy most of the positions on the team, but cohorts, 
animal companions, paladin mounts, familiars, and recurring 
NPC allies can also be members of a team.
     A team must have at least two members and no more than 
eight. To join a team, a character must have an Intelligence 
score of 3 or higher. A creat ure w ith an Intel l igence score of 1 
or 2 can be included on a team only i f it lear ns the teamwork 
trick through some character’s use of the Handle Animal skill 
(see the sidebar). A creature without an Intelligence score can 
never be part of a team.
     To maintain their teamwork benefi  ts, the characters on a team 
must train together for at least four one-week periods per year. 
These training periods need not be consecutive and can happen 
at the same time when the characters are training to ear n the new 
class features for a given level, so in most cases PCs don’t have 
to spend additional time to keep their teamwork skills sharp.
     Any  new  character  added  to  a  team  after  it  has  gained  
teamwork benefi ts must train with the other characters on 
the team for at least two weeks. During this time, she learns 
the team’s standard operating procedures and the nuances of 
her comrades’ behavior. This training can occur during the 
training time required to gain the benefi  ts of a new level.
     A character can join an adventuring party without joining 
the team that includes the other members of the group. In this 
case, the new character doesn’t gain any teamwork benefi  ts,  
but neither does her lack of prerequisites count against the 
team’s qualifi  cation for those benefi  ts.
    A character can leave a team at her own option, or by 
consensus of the other team members. For more teamwork 
benefi  ts,  see  Dungeon Master’s Guide II, pages 190 –194.
TEAMWORK BENEFIT 
DESCRIPTIONS
Below is the format for teamwork benefi  t  descriptions.
BENEFIT NAME
Description of what the benefi  t does or represents.
 Training: A brief discussion of the training procedure 
required to acquire the benefi  t. The task leader coordinates 
the training.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: A base attack bonus, a feat 
or feats, a minimum number of ranks in one or more skills, 
a class feature, or some other requirement that at least one 
character on the team must have for the team to acquire this 
benefi  t. This entr y is absent i f a teamwork benefi  t has no task 
leader prerequisite. If a benefi  t has more than one task leader 
prerequisite, the same character must meet all of them for 
the team to gain that benefi t.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Every member of the team 
must  meet  this  requirement  for  the  team  to  acquire  the  
benefit. This entry is absent if a teamwork benefit has no 
team  member  prerequisite.  If  a  benefi  t  has  more  than  one  
team member prerequisite, every character on the team must 
meet all of them for the team to gain that benefi t.
 Benefi  t: What the teamwork benefi  t enables the team to do.
pqs
HANDLE ANIMAL 
(NEW TRICK: TEAMWORK)
Use this skill to train an animal as part of a team.
 Check:  Teaching  an  animal  the  teamwork  trick  requires  a  
DC 20 Handle Animal check made as part of teamwork train-
ing. This trick allows the animal to be part of a team and thus 
benefit  from  any  teamwork  benefits  enjoyed  by  that  team.  
The  animal  must  still  meet  any  team  member  prerequisites  
required to gain the benefit.
pqs
620_95374_Ch6.indd   158620_95374_Ch6.indd   1582/8/06   4:12:05 PM2/8/06   4:12:05 PM

159
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
 Tips: Advice for players and DMs about using this team-
work benefi t.
AWARENESS
Your  team  knows  where  to  look  and  what  to  listen  for  to  
anticipate ambushes.
 Training: To train for this benefi  t, you and your teammates 
must run through scenarios in which half of you set up ambushes 
to  snare  the  others.  Through  constant  drilling,  your  team  
lear ns to l isten for speci fi  c sounds and look for random visual 
clues. By regularly exploring dangerous locales, developing 
listening skills, and staying alert for the slightest movements, 
your team gradually develops a routine for examining an area 
to prevent enemies from getting the drop on the group.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Listen 12 ranks and Spot 
12 ranks.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Listen 2 ranks or Spot 
2 ranks.
 Benefi  t:  Every  member  of  the  team  gains  a  +2  circum-
stance  bonus  on  Listen  and  Spot  checks  if  any  other  team  
member is within 30 feet.
 Tips: When moving into an area with poor lighting, or 
one that offers plenty of places for opponents to hide, it’s 
best to spread out to the outer extent of this benefi  t’s  range.  
By doing so, your group presents a less attractive target to a 
hidden spellcaster. For example, if each character is exactly 
30 feet (6 squares) away from the task leader, not everyone 
could be caught in a fi reball or similar effect.
CAMP ROUTINE
The regular routine your group has established allows you to 
set up, watch, and break down camp quickly and effi  ciently.
 Training: To develop a camp routine, the team must establish 
a regular schedule of tasks and responsibilities for each member. 
For example, one character might set up the tents while another 
starts the fi  re and a third prepares the evening meal. Your team 
must  also  set  up  a  routine  watch  schedule  so  that  everyone  
knows who goes on watch when, and for how long.
 Task  Leader  Prerequisite:  Survival  8  ranks  or  Self-
Suffi  cient.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Survival 1 rank.
 Benefi  t: Your team can set up and break camp with an eye 
toward  defensibility  and  effi  ciency.  The  team  member  on  
watch gains a +2 bonus on Spot and Listen checks, and each 
sleeping team member gains a +4 bonus on Listen checks to 
hear any sounds within 30 feet.
 Tips: Be sure to put spellcasters on the fi rst watch or last 
watch so that they can get enough uninterrupted rest to regain 
their spells. Your fi  rst priority when the party is attacked while 
you are on watch is to wake up your allies, so you should carry 
a signal whistle, bell, or similar item.
CIRCLE OF BLADES
The members of your team can combine their attacks to slice 
through the defenses of a foe they have surrounded.
 Training: You and your teammates learn to anticipate each 
other’s attacks and fi  ghting maneuvers. By correctly timing 
your blows, you can strike at a foe’s vulnerable points.
 Task  Leader  Prerequisite:  Weapon  Specialization  and  
base attack bonus +6.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Sneak attack +1d6.
 Benefi  t: Any team member who readies an action to attack 
when the task leader does gains a +2 bonus on damage rolls 
against the same target.
 Tip: The circle of blades teamwork benefi  t  works  best  
against undead, oozes, and other monsters that have immu-
nity to extra damage from sneak attacks.
CROWDED CHARGE
Because you and your allies know when to step out of each 
other’s  way,  you  can  charge  even  when  allies  are  blocking  
your path.
 Training: The members of your team learn to step aside 
whenever one of them begins a charge.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Jump 8 ranks.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Jump 1 rank.
 Benefi  t:  Other  team  members  do  not  block  movement  
for the purpose of determining whether a team member can 
charge. However, a charging team member must still end her 
movement in an unoccupied space.
 Tips: This versatile benefi  t allows the party’s rogue or ranger 
to scout ahead in a dungeon or other constrained terrain 
without worrying about blocking a fighter’s or barbarian’s 
charge. Furthermore, because the benefit also extends to 
mounted team members, a paladin can charge on horseback 
without worrying about trampling her comrades.
CUNNING AMBUSH
Your team can quickly take advantage of terrain to ambush 
opponents.
 Training: The training for this benefi  t  involves  studying  
common environments, running through ambush scenarios, 
and devising strategies that take advantage of the terrain. Your 
team must spend a few days in the hills, then in the forest, 
and then—if possible—in the shifting sands of the desert.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Hide 8 ranks and Listen 
8 ranks.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Hide 1 rank.
 Benefi  t: If the team members allow the task leader to 
prepare their hiding positions, he can make a special Hide 
check to camoufl  age them. This check is modifi  ed by each 
team member’s armor check penalty and Dexterity rather 
than the task leader’s, and the camoufl  age effect lasts until 
the team member moves. Hiding a team member in this 
manner requires 10 minutes of work.
 Tips: The ambush teamwork benefi  t is a great way to play 
smart.  Instead  of  always  going  after  the  monsters  on  their  
own t ur f, let them come to you. Tr y lur ing monsters into your 
trap with spells such as dancing lights or major image. Failing 
that, buff up the party scout with defensive spells to protect 
her while she acts as bait.
CUNNING AMBUSH, IMPROVED
When  you  are  adequately  prepared,  your  team  can  set  a  
devastating ambush.
 Training: Same as for cunning ambush.
620_95374_Ch6.indd   159620_95374_Ch6.indd   1592/8/06   4:12:12 PM2/8/06   4:12:12 PM

160
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
  Task  Leader  
Prerequisite: 
Hide  12  ranks  and  
Listen 12 ranks.
 Team  Member  Prereq-
uisite: Hide  3  ranks  and  the  
cunning ambush teamwork benefi  t.
 Benefi  t: During the surprise round, 
each team member who is not surprised 
and has been camouf laged (see Cunning 
Ambush, above) can take a full round’s worth 
of actions.
  Tips:  As  with  cunning  ambush,  this  benefi  t  is  
best used to draw enemies into your trap. To ma x imize 
the benefi t, try setting up ambushes in favorable terrain, 
such as forest (which grants a +2 bonus to AC and a +1 bonus 
on Refl  ex saves to any character standing in a space occupied 
by  a  tree)  or  a  position  of  higher  ground  (which  grants  a  
+1  bonus  on  melee  
attacks). Alternatively, 
making ranged attacks from 
the other side of an area that fea-
tures  uncertain  footing  might  discourage  
enemies from charging you.
EXPERT MOUNTAINEERS
Your team can work together to ascend diffi  cult  slopes  
and sheer surfaces with relative ease.
 Training: Constant training with expert climbers has 
made your team comfortable with ascents and descents.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Climb 8 ranks and Use Rope 
8 ranks.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Climb 1 rank or Use Rope 
1 rank.
 Benefi  t: I f a tea m member succeeds on a Cl i mb check, ever y 
other team member adjacent to him gains a +2 circumstance 
bonus on Climb checks made to ascend the same surface. 
Furthermore, each team member can make an accelerated 
climb with only a –2 penalty on the Climb check. Finally, a 
team member can catch a falling comrade by succeeding on 
a  Climb  check  against  the  wall’s  DC  (not  against  the  wall’s  
DC + 10).
 Tips: Using the appropriate climbing equipment makes 
Climb checks easier. So, to ensure success, invest in pitons 
to make your own handholds and footholds.
FOE HUNTING
Your team is especial ly good at tracking down and destroy ing 
specifi  c types of creatures.
 Training: The  training  for  this  benefit  begins  with  
intensive research on the specifi  c creature type to be hunted. 
You and your teammates must drill on the various features 
Expert mountaineers
gain the upper hand in 
a battle with harpies
620_95374_Ch6.indd   160620_95374_Ch6.indd   1602/8/06   4:12:19 PM2/8/06   4:12:19 PM

161
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
and traits of the chosen creature until you learn its every 
idiosyncrasy.  Finally,  the  team  must  stage  mock  combats  
so that each of you can learn to take advantage of the target 
creature’s weaknesses.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Favored enemy (any one) +4.
 Team  Member  Prerequisite:  Survival  1  rank  and  base  
attack bonus +4.
    Benefi  t: Each team member who assumes a fl  anking  posi-
tion with the task leader against his favored enemy gains a 
+2 bonus on damage rolls against that creature.
 Tips: To make optimum use of this benefi t, the task leader 
should wear light armor or use spells that improve his speed.
GROUP TR ANCE
You and your teammates reduce your susceptibility to sleep 
by learning the ways of the elves.
 Training: Your team members learn the secrets of elf 
trance and can slip into a trance state by establishing a physi-
cal link with the task leader. This trance state allows each 
member to gain the benefi t of sleep by cleansing her mind 
and entering a deep meditative state.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Elf blood (elf or half-elf ).
 Team Member Prerequisite: Concentration 1 rank.
 Benefi  t: When team members join hands, the task leader 
can create a trance link that allows each of them, regardless 
of  race,  to  meditate  in  the  same  manner  as  elves  do.  Every  
team member gains the benefi  t of 8 hours of sleep after just 
4 hours of meditation.
 Tips: Let all the spellcasters in the group rest while the 
warriors stay on guard. If the group’s elf trances with half the 
team at a time, your party can get by with two well-manned 
guard watches per night rather than several shorter shifts.
INDIRECT FIRE
Your team has a forward observer called a spotter, who locates 
enemies and reveals their positions.
 Training: You and your teammates practice aiming at unseen 
targets using directions from allies. Eventually, you learn to 
fi re accurately at targets that have cover based on the body 
language and gestures of the spotter.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Precise Shot and base attack 
bonus +6.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Spot 3 ranks.
 Benefi  t: This benefi  t denies opponents some of the protec-
tion nor mal ly granted by cover or conceal ment. If the spot ter 
has an unobstructed line of sight to the covered or concealed 
target, she can, as a move action, use hand gestures, spoken 
directions, and body language to alert allies wielding ranged 
weapons to the target’s position. If the target has cover, it gains 
only half the normal cover bonus to Armor Class against 
the team’s ranged attacks. If the target has concealment, the 
attacker rolls the miss chance twice to determine whether 
his attack hits. A spotter who can see invisible targets can 
use this ability to allow a reroll on the miss chance to strike 
an invisible creature.
 Tips: Team members with darkvision make the best spot-
ters, since they can use their special sight to locate creatures 
that are taking advantage of shadowy or dark conditions.
LIKE A ROCK
Like dwarves, the members of your team are stable on their 
feet.
 Training: Your team develops resilience against unbalanc-
ing attacks by working closely with a dwarf or some other 
st urdy member of the par t y. When the team stands together, 
its members are diffi  cult to dislodge.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Stability (as dwarf racial trait).
 Team Member Prerequisite: Balance 1 rank.
 Benefi  t: The task leader’s stability bonus against bull rush 
or tr ip at tempts ex tends to al l team members adjacent to her. 
This bonus stacks with that provided by stability.
 Tips: This benefi  t requires the team to bunch up, so if the 
enemy has a number of area attacks, be sure to beef everyone 
up with spells and abilities that grant energy resistance. If 
you must spread out, don’t move so far apart that you can’t 
help an ally who is knocked prone.
MASSED CHARGE
When your team charges, it smashes into the foe as a single 
great, implacable mass.
 Training: You and your teammates learn to charge as one. 
You line up in a tight formation and time your strides to move 
in tight synchronicity.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Balance 5 ranks.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Balance 1 rank.
 Benefi  t: The team can make a special charge attack. All 
team members move on the same initiative count, and each 
must charge and attack the same target. Each team member 
gains a bonus on his attack roll after the charge equal to the 
number of teammates participating.
 Tips: This benefi  t works best against a single, large oppo-
nent. A smaller opponent presents too narrow a point of 
contact for you to maximize this ability.
MISSILE VOLLEY
Your team excels at fi  ring as a group, unleashing a saturated 
wave of arrows and bolts. Each member places her shots so 
that the target cannot dodge them all.
 Training: Your team practices by taking aim at a number 
of  small  targets  clustered  together  (representing  different  
spots on the body of a single enemy). Each of you can learn 
to place your shots so as to cover every part of a target with 
a single joint volley.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Far Shot and Precise Shot.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Point Blank Shot.
 Benefi  t:  Every member of the team who readies an action 
to fi re a missile weapon when the task leader does gains a 
bonus on the attack roll equal to the number of team mem-
bers fi  ring. The task leader also qualifi  es for the bonus, even 
though she did not ready an action. All these attacks must 
be made against the same target.
 Tips: Since everyone except the task leader must ready an 
action to fi  re, the other team members lose their additional 
attacks. Thus, the team is trading a high number of attack 
rolls for a smaller number of attacks that are more likely to hit. 
This benefi  t works best when a single, skilled archer (the task 
leader) uses her teammates’ help to improve her accuracy.
Illus. by D. Hudnut
620_95374_Ch6.indd   161620_95374_Ch6.indd   1612/8/06   4:12:26 PM2/8/06   4:12:26 PM

162
CHAPTER 6
THE ADVENTURING 
GROUP
STEADFAST RESOLVE
Your  team  members  can  use  their  camaraderie  and  shared  
experience to shrug off the effect of fear.
 Training: Through  long  experience  in  dealing  with  
adversity,  you  and  your  teammates  develop  the  trust  and  
support needed to bolster each other’s minds when subjected 
to magical fear.
 Task  Leader  Prerequisite:  Concentration  8  ranks  and  
Iron Will.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Base Will save bonus +2.
 Benefi  t: Any team member who must make a saving throw 
against a fear spell or effect gains a +2 circumstance bonus 
on the save if he can see or hear at least one team member.
 Tips: Some fear-based spel ls a f fect areas. If you cast such 
a spell on an area that includes both allies and enemies, 
your teammates are likely to make the save while the foes 
run away.
SUPERIOR TEAM EFFORT
When your team works together on a task—whether it’s 
battering down a door, talking a nervous innkeeper into 
allowing everyone to spend the night, or sneaking past a 
guard—everyone on the team does a better than average job 
of assisting each other’s efforts.
 Training:  Your  team  focuses  on  improving  a  particular  
skill. Each team member watches the task leader and learns 
a few specifi  c actions that can help her succeed.
 Task  Leader  Prerequisite:  8  ranks  in  a  skill  and  Skill  
Focus for the same skill.
 Team Member Prerequisite: 1 rank in the skill to which 
the task leader’s Skill Focus feat applies.
 Special: This teamwork benefi  t  applies  only  to  checks  
made  with  the  skill  to  which  the  task  leader’s  Skill  Focus  
feat applies.
 Benefi  t: Any team member who attempts to aid another 
member’s check with the relevant skill must make a DC 5 
check to succeed rather than a DC 10 check.
TEAM MELEE TACTICS
Because your group fi ghts as an effective team in melee, its 
members can use the aid another action with greater than 
normal effi  ciency.
 Training: Your team st udies each member ’s tactics, fi  ght-
ing style, and tendencies. These hours of focused observation 
allow each member to understand how best to help the rest 
of the team.
 Task  Leader  Prerequisite:  Combat  Expertise  and  
Dodge.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +6.
 Benefi  t: Whenever a team member uses the aid another 
action to grant another member a bonus on attack rolls, that 
bonus increases by 1.
 Tips: The aid another action allows an ally to strike with 
super ior accuracy at the ex pense of the aiding character ’s own 
attacks. Thus, the ally who receives the assistance should be the 
best qualifi  ed team member to ta ke down the foe —whether 
by vir tue of damage reduction, high AC, or the abilit y to use 
Power Attack for extra damage.
TEAM RUSH
Your team travels faster than normal as a group. The efforts 
and assistance of the faster characters allow the slower ones 
to keep up.
 Training: Your team must march for a week as a group, 
traveling across roads, dells, forests, and mountain passes. By 
so doing, each team member lear ns how best to help ever yone 
move together.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Survival 8 ranks and Endurance.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Survival 1 rank.
 Benefi  t: When the entire team is traveling overland on 
foot, each team member moves at the task leader ’s speed. This 
benefi  t  does  not  extend  to  combat  and  similar  short-term  
movement situations, or to mounted characters.
 Tips: A barbarian is the best task leader for this teamwork 
benefi  t. At the cost of a prerequisite feat, he al lows his al lies to 
travel much more quickly across the countryside. In campaigns 
that feature frequent wilderness or underground travel, the 
time saved might prove to be a major benefi t.
TEAM SHIELD MANEUVER
When  your  team  fi  ghts  as  a  group,  its  members  can  close  
ranks to protect a badly injured ally.
 Training:  Your  group  learns  to  react  quickly  when  an  ally  
falls. You drill in pushing aside a wounded team member before 
he tumbles to the ground and moving him out of harm’s way.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Shield Specialization (see 
page 82).
 Team Member Prerequisite: Shield Profi  ciency.
 Benefi  t: When a team member’s hit points drop to –1 or 
lower, any teammate adjacent to him who carries a shield can 
use an immediate action to push him out of harm’s way. The 
injured team member moves 10 feet before falling prone.
 Tip:  This  tactic  works  best  if  one  of  the  group’s  second-
line characters has a potion or wand ready to heal the fallen 
character. In this case, even a character who isn’t a member 
of the team can play a valuable role in making the most of 
this benefi t.
WALL OF STEEL
By closing ranks and locking shields together, you and your 
teammates form an impenetrable barrier to shield a more 
vulnerable team member from enemies.
 Training: Your group stands in a tight formation and locks 
shields while a hired mercenary or assistant pelts everyone 
with blunt arrows. Each bruising shot reminds you to improve 
your form and teamwork.
 Task Leader Prerequisite: Tower Sh ield P rofi  ciency  and  
base attack bonus +8.
 Team Member Prerequisite: Shield Profi  ciency and base 
attack bonus +2.
 Benefi  t:  As  a  swift  action,  any  member  of  the  team  can  
lose his shield bonus to AC and grant it to a single adjacent 
team member instead. This bonus stacks w ith the recipient ’s 
existing shield bonus, if any.
 Tip: Any arcane spellcasters who are frequently exposed 
to missile fi  re might want to take the Shield Profi  ciency  feat  
to gain this teamwork benefi t.
620_95374_Ch6.indd   162620_95374_Ch6.indd   1622/8/06   4:12:32 PM2/8/06   4:12:32 PM

rom the Knights of the Round Table to the Circle 
of Eight, from the Vestal Virgins to the Knights 
Templar,  fantasy,  myth,  and  medieval  romance  
have always been fi lled with affi  liations. Where would 
Robin Hood be without his band of Merry Men? For 
that matter, what challenge would the Sheriff of Notting-
ham present without his tax men and the support of the 
usurper  King  John?  Could  Frodo  have  survived  without  
the Fellowship?
     An  affiliation  can  be  large  or  small.  Its  armies  could  
thunder like the wrath of a just god across continents and 
planes to change the face of the multiverse. It could quietly 
toil  in  an  outlying  village  keeping  the  children  asleep  at  
night while a vampire is bound safely in the secret cellar 
under Old Man Hart’s feed barn. An affi liation might be 
centuries old, or it might have begun only last fall with the 
discovery of a dryad’s severed arm in the alley behind the 
tavern. An affi  liation might be good or evil. It could solicit 
funds to build mithral-domed temples to Heironeous where 
crusading clergy heal the sick and rest after patrolling the 
night trade roads. It could subtly undermine the faith of 
the paladin king, inspiring him to kill his wife in a jealous 
rage and rise again as a blackguard to bring a dark age to 
the kingdom. 
    An    affi  liation can be almost any group of people, limited 
only by their imagination and their ability to form common 
goals. An ancient cabal of liches, the strict ecclesiastical Wee 
Jasian hierarchy, the king’s bodyguards, the thieves’ guild, 
the old apothecary and the three daughters that help to run 
his shop—all these and more are affi  liations.
BROADENING 
YOUR GAME
Affi  liations  add  another  level  to  the  D&D  experience.  
They pull the focus back a step, broadening it from the 
adventure–loot–sell cycle that makes up some player 
characters’ activities. With affi  liations, the community 
comes to the fore. Conspiracies, kingmaking, war, 
piracy, famine, revolution, business, plague, or the 
founding of an empire take center stage for a time. 
When  the  tarrasque  appears,  an  entire  kingdom  
mobilizes  (while  the  neighboring  kingdom  prom-
ises aid but sends assassins, hoping to advance on a 
weakened foe after planting season). When a new 
prophet preaches in the West and gathers followers, 
repercussions ripple through churches far and wide, 
tithes decrease, and the old rites are threatened. 
When kingdoms clash and food is scarce, when 
churches excommunicate the best among them and 
beatify the worst, when comets blaze forth the deaths 
of princes and revolution grips the land in a paroxysm 
of metamor phosis —that is when a f fi  liations  come  to  
the fore to play out their grand drama.
163
Illus. by R. HorsleyIllus. by R. Horsley
620_95374_Ch7.indd   163620_95374_Ch7.indd   1632/8/06   4:20:05 PM2/8/06   4:20:05 PM

164