CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
Table 3–1: General Feats
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
Acrobatic Strike Tumble 12 ranks +6 on next attack against opponent you tumble past
Arcane Flourish Perform 4 ranks, arcane caster level 1st Expend spell to gain bonus on Perform check
   Arcane Accompaniment   Perform 4 ranks, Arcane Flourish,  Expend prepared spell or spell slot to extend duration
 arcane caster level 1st, bardic music of bardic music
Arcane Thesis Knowledge (arcana) 9 ranks,  +2 caster level, cheaper metamagic with one spell
 ability to cast arcane spells
Arcane Toughness Toughness, arcane caster level 3rd Expend prepared spell or spell slot to heal when at or 
  below 0 hit points
   Arcane Consumption Arcane Toughness, Toughness,  +2 save DC for one spell, Con penalty for 12 hours and
 arcane caster level 6th fatigued
Armor Specialization Proficiency with selected armor type,  DR 2/– with chosen armor
 base attack bonus +12
Battle Dancer Base attack bonus +2, bardic music +2 on attacks while moving and using bardic music
Bonded Familiar Familiar You and familiar shift damage after deadly attack
Bounding Assault Dex 13, Dodge, Mobility, Spring Attack,  Attack twice while using Spring Attack
 base attack bonus +12
   Rapid Blitz Dex 13, Bounding Assault, Dodge,  Make third attack as part of Spring Attack
 Mobility, Spring Attack, 
 base attack bonus +18
Brutal Strike Str 13, Power Attack, base attack bonus +6     Daze opponent with successful bludgeoning attack
Combat Acrobat Balance 9 ranks, Tumble 9 ranks Gain new uses for Balance skill
Combat Familiar Arcane caster level 1st, familiar Familiar enters foe’s square without provoking attack
   Lurking Familiar Combat Familiar, arcane caster level 6th Familiar can hide in your square
Combat Tactician Dex 13, Dodge, base attack bonus +12 +2 on damage against foe you approach and attack
Cometary Collision Str 13, Improved Bull Rush, Power Attack     Ready action to slam into charging foe
Companion Spellbond Animal companion Share spells with companion at greater range
Crossbow Sniper Proficiency with hand, heavy, or light Half Dexterity bonus on crossbow damage, 60 ft. 
 crossbow, Weapon Focus with hand,  skirmish or sneak attack
 heavy, or light crossbow, base attack bonus +1
Cunning Evasion Hide 9 ranks, evasion Hide and move immediately after using evasion
Dampen Spell Improved Counterspell Reduce your save DC against foe’s spell by expending 
  spell or slot as immediate action
Deadeye Shot Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot,  Ready action to fire, denying foe Dex bonus to AC
 base attack bonus +4,  on your attack after ally hits foe
 skirmish or sneak attack ability
Defensive Sweep Base attack bonus +15 Foe must move or provoke attack
Elven Spell Lore Int 17 or elf, Knowledge (arcana) 12 ranks    Bonus on dispel attempts, alter energy type of spell
Fade into Violence Bluff 6 ranks, Hide 6 ranks Foe strikes ally, not you, if your Bluff check succeeds 
Fiery Fist Dex 13, Wis 13, Improved Unarmed Strike,   Expend Stunning Fist use to cloak fists, feet in fiery 
 Stunning Fist, base attack bonus +8 energy for +1d6 damage
   Fiery Ki Defense Dex 13, Wis 13, Fiery Fist, Improved  Expend Stunning Fist use to cloak self in flame, 
 Unarmed Strike, Stunning Fist,  damaging any who strike you
 base attack bonus +8
   Ki Blast Dex 13, Wis 13, Fiery Fist, Improved  Expend Stunning Fist uses to throw ball of ki energy
 Unarmed Strike, Stunning Fist, 
 base attack bonus +8
Flay Str 13, Power Attack Inflict painful wounds on unarmored targets
Grenadier — +1 on attacks and damage with splash weapons
Hindering Opportunist Combat Reflexes, base attack bonus +3 Replace attack of opportunity with aid another
   Stalwart Defense Combat Reflexes, Hindering Opportunist,    Foes provoke aid another action from you when they
 base attack bonus +9 attack allies
Indomitable Soul Endurance, Iron Will Roll twice against fear and mind-affecting attacks
Intimidating Strike Intimidate 4 ranks Use Intimidate check with attack to shake opponent
Keen-Eared Scout Listen 6 ranks,  Listen check reveals extra information about sound
 Alertness or Skill Focus (Listen)
Leap of the Heavens Jump 4 ranks Don’t double DC for standing jumps, +5 bonus on 
                                                                                          running                                             jumps
Lunging Strike Base attack bonus +6 Extend reach of one attack
Mad Foam Rager Rage or frenzy ability Once per rage or frenzy, delay spell or attack effect
Master Manipulator Cha 13, Diplomacy 9 ranks Gain two new uses of Diplomacy skill
Melee Evasion Dex 13, Int 13, Combat Expertise, Dodge While fi ghting defensively, negate foe’s attack
Melee Weapon Mastery Proficiency with selected weapon,  Gain Weapon Focus, Weapon Specialization benefits
 Weapon Focus with selected weapon,  with multiple weapons
 Weapon Specialization with selected 
 weapon, base attack bonus +8
620_95374_Ch3.indd   72620_95374_Ch3.indd   722/8/06   3:50:19 PM2/8/06   3:50:19 PM

73
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
   Crushing Strike Proficiency with a bludgeoning weapon,  +1 on attacks per previous hit with bludgeon
 Weapon Focus with a bludgeoning weapon, 
 Melee Weapon Mastery (bludgeoning), Weapon 
 Specialization with a bludgeoning weapon, 
 base attack bonus +14
   Driving Attack Proficiency with selected weapon,  Bull rush with piercing weapon attack
 Weapon Focus with selected weapon, 
 Melee Weapon Mastery (piercing), Weapon 
 Specialization with selected weapon, 
 base attack bonus +14
   Slashing Flurry Proficiency with selected weapon,  Gain extra attack with slashing weapon
 Weapon Focus with selected weapon, 
 Melee Weapon Mastery (slashing), Weapon 
 Specialization with selected weapon, 
 base attack bonus +14
   Weapon Supremacy Proficiency with selected weapon,  Gain further abilities with chosen weapon
 Greater Weapon Focus with selected 
 weapon, Greater Weapon Specialization 
 with selected weapon, Weapon Focus 
 with selected weapon, Weapon 
 Specialization with selected weapon, 
 Melee Weapon Mastery with weapon type 
 of selected weapon, fi ghter level 18th
Overwhelming Assault Base attack bonus +15 Gain bonus against adjacent foe not attacking you 
Penetrating Shot Str 15, Point Blank Shot,  Your ranged attack targets every foe in 60-ft. line
 base attack bonus +10
Ranged Weapon Mastery   Proficiency with selected weapon,  Gain Weapon Focus, Weapon Specialization benefits
 Weapon Focus with selected weapon,  with multiple weapons
 Weapon Specialization with selected 
 weapon, base attack bonus +8
Robilar’s Gambit Combat Reflexes, base attack bonus +12 Grant foes bonus on attacks and damage, but their 
  attacks provoke attacks of opportunity
Shield Specialization Proficiency with shields Increase shield bonus by +1
   Active Shield Defense Proficiency with shields,  Make attacks of opportunity without penalty when
 Shield Specialization fi ghting defensively
   Agile Shield Fighter Proficiency with shields, Improved Shield    Reduce two weapon penalties when using shield bash
 Bash, Shield Specialization
   Shield Sling Proficiency with shields, Improved  Use shield as ranged weapon
 Shield Bash, Shield Specialization, 
 base attack bonus +9
   Shield Ward Proficiency with shields,  Gain shield bonus to touch AC and against bull rush, 
 Shield Specialization disarm, grapple, overrun, and trip
Short Haft Proficiency with selected weapon,  Lose reach benefits, attack adjacent foes
 Weapon Focus with selected weapon, 
 base attack bonus +3
Spectral Skirmisher Base attack bonus +6 Gain bonuses while invisible
Spell-Linked Familiar Arcane caster level 9th, familiar Familiar gains limited spellcasting ability
Steadfast Determination    Endurance Use Constitution to modify Will saves
Telling Blow Skirmish attack or sneak attack Gain skirmish or sneak attack damage on critical hits
Trophy Collector Craft (taxidermy) 6 ranks Gain bonuses from trophies you create and wear
Tumbling Feint Bluff 4 ranks, Tumble 4 ranks +5 on feint attempt after successful Tumble
Two-Weapon Pounce Dex 15, Two-Weapon Fighting,  Attack with both weapons when charging
 base attack bonus +6
Two-Weapon Rend Dex 15, Two-Weapon Fighting,  Gain bonus damage if you hit with both weapons
 base attack bonus +11
Vatic Gaze Arcane caster level 9th Detect magic at will, use Sense Motive to determine 
  foe’s highest-level spell
Versatile Unarmed Strike    Improved Unarmed Strike Deal bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing damage 
                                                                                          with                                             unarmed                                             strikes
Vexing Flanker Combat Reflexes +4 on attacks when flanking
   Adaptable Flanker Combat Reflexes, Vexing Flanker,  Flank chosen foe from adjacent square
 base attack bonus +4
Wanderer’s Diplomacy Halfling or 4 ranks in Bluff, Diplomacy,  Gain special social abilities
 and Sense Motive
Water Splitting Stone Dex 13, Wis 13, Improved Unarmed Strike,   +4 bonus on damage when striking foe that has DR
 Stunning Fist, base attack bonus +9
620_95374_Ch3.indd   73620_95374_Ch3.indd   732/8/06   3:50:25 PM2/8/06   3:50:25 PM

74
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
Benefi  t: As a swift action, you designate a single opponent 
as the target of this feat. When you are adjacent to the chosen 
target, you can choose to count as occupying any other square 
you threaten for purposes of determining fl  anking  bonuses  
for you and your allies. You also occupy your current square 
for fl  anking an opponent.
Special: A fi ghter can select Adaptable Flanker as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
AGILE SHIELD FIGHTER
You are skilled in combining your shield bash attack with 
an armed strike. When you use your shield in unison with 
a weapon, your training allows you to score telling blows 
with both.
Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with shields, Improved Shield 
Bash, Shield Specialization.
Benefi  t: When making a shield bash and armed strike 
attack as part of a full attack action, you take a –2 penalty 
on each attack. These penalties replace the normal ones you 
incur for fi  ghting with two weapons.
Special: A fi ghter can select Agile Shield Fighter as one 
of his fi  ghter  bonus  feats.
ARCANE ACCOMPANIMENT
You infuse your performance with magical energy, allowing 
its effects to continue even as you attend to other tasks.
Prerequisites: Perform 4 ranks, Arcane Flourish, arcane 
caster level 1st, bardic music.
Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can expend a pre-
pared spell or a spell slot to extend the duration of 
your bardic music ability after you stop perform-
ing.  You  extend  the  duration  a  number  of  
rounds  equal  to  the  level  of  the  spell  
used  in  this  manner.  This  
extension is in addition to 
the  normal  duration  of  
the effect after you stop 
your performance.
     You  c a n  ex pend  
only one spell slot 
to  extend  the  du-
ration  of  your  
bardic  music.  
The  slot  can  come  from  any  of  your  arcane  caster  classes,  
not just bard.
     This has no effect on bardic music or similar abilities with 
a duration of instantaneous or permanent.
ARCANE CONSUMPTION
You can sacrifi  ce your physical health to strengthen a spell. 
This process leaves you wracked with pain, but the enhanced 
energy you draw from the spell might provide the margin 
between victory and defeat.
 Prerequisites: Arcane Toughness, Toughness, arcane 
caster level 6th.
 Benefi  t: Once per day as a swift action, you can grant the 
next spell you cast a +4 bonus on its save DC. You must cast 
and complete this spell on the same turn that you use a swift 
action to activate this feat. In return, you take a –4 penalty 
to Constitution for 12 hours and are fatigued.
ARCANE FLOURISH
You use your magical abilities to improve your performance 
talents. By bleeding magical energy into your singing, oratory, 
or other abilities, you enhance the pitch and sound, project 
your voice with a more commanding tone, and so forth.
Prerequisites: Perform 4 ranks, arcane caster level 1st.
 Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can expend a prepared spell 
or spell slot to grant your next Perform check a competence 
bonus  equal  to  1  +  the  level  of  the  spell  or  slot.  You  must  
make a check within 1 minute of using 
this  feat,  or  the  energy  you  expend  
dissipates with no effect.
ARCANE THESIS
You have studied a single 
spell  in-depth.  Your  
expertise  grants  you  
formidable   though   
narrowly focused 
arcane mastery.
          Prerequisites: 
Knowledge (arcana) 
9 ranks, ability to cast 
arcane spells.
An elf uses Acrobatic Strike to get the drop on a giant
Illus. by E. Fiegenschuh
620_95374_Ch3.indd   74620_95374_Ch3.indd   742/8/06   3:50:32 PM2/8/06   3:50:32 PM

75
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
Benefi  t:  Choose one arcane spell that you can cast to be your 
thesis spel l. When casting that spel l, you do so at +2 caster level. 
When you apply a metamagic feat other than Heighten Spell 
to that spell, the enhanced spell uses up a spell slot one level 
lower than normal. For example, an empowered thesis spell 
uses up a spell slot one level higher than the spell’s actual slot 
(rather than the normal two levels higher).
Special: You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects 
do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a 
new spell.
ARCANE TOUGHNESS
You draw upon the power of your magic to sustain yourself, 
allowing you to continue fi ghting long after your physical 
body has failed you.
Prerequisites: Toughness, arcane caster level 3rd.
Benefi  t: You can expend a prepared spell or spell slot as 
an immediate action when you are reduced to 0 or fewer hit 
points. You heal a number of points of damage equal to the 
level of the spell or spell slot used in this manner. You cannot 
use  this  ability  to  negate  effects  that  disable  you  without  
causing hit point damage, such as a medusa’s ability to turn 
you to stone. Even if this healing does not bring you above 
negative hit points, it still stabilizes you.
    Using a 0-level spell with this feat grants no benefi t.
ARMOR SPECIALIZATION
Through long wear and hours of combat, you have trained 
your body to believe in its armor. Where others fl  inch,  you  
confront.  When  the  sword  falls,  your  instincts,  born  of  
bruises and rent fl  esh, present your cuirass, cuisse, helm, or 
gorget  to  meet  the  blade  at  the  perfect  angle,  causing  it  to  
skitter off harmlessly. 
Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with selected armor type, base 
attack bonus +12.
Benefi  t: Choose one t y pe of medium or heav y ar mor w ith 
which you are profi  cient. When wearing masterwork armor 
(including magic armor) of that type, you gain damage reduc-
tion 2/–. Any time you lose your Dexterity bonus to Armor 
Class, you lose the benefi t of this feat, because you cannot 
properly defl  ect the blows of the enemy.
Special: You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects 
do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a 
new type of armor.
    A    fi ghter can select Armor Specialization as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
BAT TLE DANCER
You strike at your foes in time with the music you 
sing or in cadence with an oration you deliver. The 
magical power of your bardic performance drives you 
forward and improves your fi ghting ability.
 Prerequisites: Base attack bonus +2, bardic music.
Benefi  t: During a round in which you grant any ally a 
bonus on at tack rol ls, damage rol ls, or saves w ith one of 
your bardic music abilities, you gain a +2 morale bonus 
on  your  attack  rolls  if  you  move  at  least  one  square  
before attacking. You lose this benefi t for the remaining 
duration of your current use of bardic music if you do not 
move or if you do not attack on your turn. If you stand still 
and attack (or move without attacking), you do not gain this 
feat’s benefi  t, but this ability’s duration continues.
 Special: A fi ghter can select Battle Dancer as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
BONDED FAMILIAR
You enjoy a stronger than normal magical bond with your 
familiar, granting you access to two special abilities.
 Prerequisite: Familiar.
Benefi  t: As long as your familiar is within 30 feet of you, 
the  two  of  you  can  share  the  damage  from  a  single  deadly  
attack. Once per day, if an attack would drop your familiar 
to 0 or fewer hit points, you can instead choose to accept that 
damage. In addition, once per day, your familiar can choose 
to take the damage from a single attack or effect that would 
reduce you to 0 or fewer hit points. This ability applies only 
to attacks or effects that deal hit point damage. You or your 
familiar could not absorb the effect of a spell such as fl  e s h   
to stone.
BOUNDING ASSAULT
You can move and attack with superior speed and power.
    Prerequisites: Dex 13, Dodge, Mobility, Spring Attack, 
base attack bonus +12.
     Benefi  t: When using the Spr ing At tack feat, you designate 
two foes rather than one. Your movement does not provoke 
attacks of opportunity from either of these foes. While using 
an attack action with the Spring Attack feat, you can 
make a second attack with a –5 penalty. You can 
use both attacks against one of the opponents 
targeted  with  this  feat,  or  split  your  attacks  
between them.
Arcane Accompaniment channels magical energy into Gimble’s song
Illus. by C. Frank
620_95374_Ch3.indd   75620_95374_Ch3.indd   752/8/06   3:50:41 PM2/8/06   3:50:41 PM

76
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
BRUTAL STRIKE
You can batter foes senseless with your mace, morningstar, 
quarterstaff, or fl  ail. Few victims are willing to stand toe-
to-toe  with  a  warrior  known  for  knocking  his  foes  witless  
with a single strike.
Prerequisites: Str 13, Power Attack, base attack bonus +6.
Benefi  t: If you use your Power Attack feat to increase your 
damage with a bludgeoning weapon, you can attempt a brutal 
strike. You must declare your intention before making your 
attack.  If  the  attack  hits  and  your  opponent  takes  damage,  
he must make a Fortitude save (DC 10 + your extra damage 
from the Power Attack feat on the attack) or be sickened for 
1 round.
    You can use this feat once per round during your attack 
action.
Special: This feat cannot be used against a creature that 
is not subject to extra damage from critical hits.
    A fighter can select Brutal Strike as one of his fighter 
bonus feats.
COMBAT ACROBAT
Your acrobatics and agility in combat allow you to maneuver 
across  the  battlefi  eld  with  ease.  You  stay  on  your  feet  and  
speed over diffi  cult terrain due to your superior athleticism 
and acrobatic talents.
 Prerequisites: Balance 9 ranks, Tumble 9 ranks.
Benefi  t: You gain several benefi  ts from this feat to refl  ect  
your overall athletic ability and training in the skills vital to 
an acrobat.
 Acrobatic Recovery: If an ef fect causes you to fal l prone, you 
can make a DC 20 Balance check to remain on your feet.
 Sure Footed Maneuver: With a DC 15 Balance check, you can 
ignore up to 4 squares of diffi  cult terrain while moving. You 
treat  these  squares  as  normal  terrain.  You  still  endure  any  
effects or hazards associated with the terrain. For example, 
a shallow pool of boiling water might deal fi  re  damage  and  
count as diffi  cult terrain. You would still take damage from 
the water even if your Balance check allowed you to move 
through it at full speed.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Combat Acrobat as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
COMBAT FAMILIAR
Your fami l iar is ski l led in del iver ing at tack spel ls against your 
foes. It fl  its past their defenses to discharge its spell without 
leaving itself vulnerable to attack.
Prerequisites: Arcane caster level 1st, familiar.
Bounding Assault enables this fi ghter to target two foes instead of one
Illus. by J. Nelson
620_95374_Ch3.indd   76620_95374_Ch3.indd   762/8/06   3:50:50 PM2/8/06   3:50:50 PM

77
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
Benefi  t: If your familiar holds the charge for a touch spell, 
it does not provoke an attack of opportunity for entering an 
opponent’s square.
COMBAT TACTICIAN
You excel at approaching an opponent from an unexpected 
direction to del iver deadly at tacks. As you approach your foe, 
you duck and weave to confuse his defenses. Alternatively, 
you draw a weapon and make a quick attack that surprises 
your foe.
    Prerequisites: Dex 13, Dodge, base attack bonus +12.
    Benefi  t: You can designate one specifi  c foe as the target of 
this feat as a free action. If neither you nor the target threatens 
each other at the start of your turn, you gain a +2 bonus on 
melee damage against that target during your turn.
COMETARY COLLISION
You  are  a  thunderbolt  of  destruction  on  the  battlefi  eld.  By  
carefully timing your charge, you rush forward and slam into 
an enemy just as he gathers the speed needed to charge you. 
You turn your opponent’s momentum against him.
Prerequisites: Str  13,  Improved  Bull  Rush,  Power  
Attack.
Benefi  t: You can ready a standard action to use this feat 
when an opponent charges you or any other target. At any 
point during your opponent’s charge, you can charge him. 
In place of the normal charge benefi  ts, you gain +2 on your 
attack roll and +4 on your damage roll. Your foe loses the 
benefi  ts  of  charging  (but  not  the  penalties)  but  can  still  
attack you. If the target charged someone else, he can choose 
to instead attack you. You take the standard –2 penalty to 
AC for charging.
     If you cannot move at least 10 feet or cannot charge due to 
terrain or other factors, you do not gain this feat’s benefi t. In 
either case, you use your readied action to move but do not 
gain an attack.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Cometary Collision as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
COMPANION SPELLBOND
You form a special magical link with your animal com-
panion, allowing you to share spells with it over a greater 
distance.
Prerequisite: Animal companion.
 Benefi  t: You use your companion’s share spells ability out 
to a range of 30 feet, rather than the standard 5 feet. You can 
cast touch spells to affect your companion at a greater range 
than normal. You can change a spell’s range from touch to 
short (range of 25 feet + 5 feet per two caster levels) if the 
spell targets only your companion.
CROSSBOW SNIPER
You are skilled in lining up accurate, deadly shots with 
your crossbow. Perhaps you add custom-made sights to your 
weapon, or you have learned to maximize the stability and 
precision the weapon offers.
 Prerequisites: Proficiency w ith hand, heav y, or l ight 
crossbow, Weapon Focus with hand, heavy, or light crossbow, 
base attack bonus +1.
Benefi  t: When using a crossbow for which you have the 
Weapon Focus feat, you gain a bonus on damage rolls equal 
to 1/2 your Dexterity bonus.
     If you have the skirmish or sneak attack ability, the maxi-
mum  range  at  which  you  can  make  such  attacks  increases  
Tordek uses Cometary Collision to close quickly with a displacer beast skeleton
Illus. by E. Widermann
620_95374_Ch3.indd   77620_95374_Ch3.indd   772/8/06   3:51:02 PM2/8/06   3:51:02 PM

78
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
to 60 feet when you are using a crossbow for which you have 
the Weapon Focus feat.
 Special:  A  fi  ghter  can  select  Crossbow  Sniper  as  one  of  
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
CRUSHING STRIKE
You wield a bludgeoning weapon with superior power, allow-
ing you to batter aside an opponent’s defenses.
    Prerequisites: Profi ciency with a bludgeoning weapon, 
Weapon Focus with a bludgeoning weapon, Weapon Mastery 
(bludgeoning), Weapon Specialization with a bludgeoning 
weapon, base attack bonus +14.
    Benefi  t: When you use a full attack action while fi ghting 
with any bludgeoning weapon, each attack that connects beats 
down your foe’s defenses, granting a cumulative +1 bonus on 
attack rolls until the end of your current turn.
CUNNING EVASION
When an area attack detonates around you, you use the chaos 
and fl  ash of energy to duck out of sight.
 Prerequisites: Hide 9 ranks, evasion.
 Benefi  t: If you are caught within an area attack whose 
damage you avoid completely due to your evasion or improved 
evasion ability, you can make a combined Hide check and 
a  5-foot  step  as  an  immediate  action.  You  can  attempt  this  
check  only  if  there  is  cover  suitable  for  a  Hide  check,  and  
you can take your 5-foot step into cover before making your 
Hide attempt.
 Special: If you have the hide in plain sight class feature, 
you do not need cover near you to attempt the Hide check 
allowed by this feat.
DAMPEN SPELL
From the lowliest prestidigitator to the most august hiero-
phant,  spellcasters  both  arcane  and  divine  recognize  the  
power  of  counterspelling.  You  are  no  exception.  You  have  
learned  to  channel  energy  into  a  foe’s  spell  to  weaken  its  
effects. Although you fail to nullify the spell, you render it 
much easier to resist.
 Prerequisite: Improved Counterspell.
 Benefi  t: You can use an immediate action to attempt to 
dampen an enemy ’s spel l. As w ith counterspel l ing, you must 
identify the target spell as it is being cast. If you successfully 
identify it, you can expend any spell or spell slot to dampen 
your opponent ’s incantation. Because of your hast y, immedi-
ate casting, you do not fully counter the target spell. Instead, 
you  subtract  the  level  of  the  spell  or  spell  slot  you  expend  
from the save DC of your opponent’s spell.
DEADEYE SHOT
You carefully line up a ranged attack, timing it precisely 
so  that  you  hit  your  opponent  when  his  guard  is  down.  
When your target is busy deal ing w ith an al ly ’s melee at tack, 
you strike.
 Prerequisites: Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, base attack 
bonus +4, skirmish or sneak attack ability.
 Benefi  t: By fi  ring just as your ally connects with a blow, 
you take advantage of the distraction to strike the same enemy 
when his guard is ruined. If you ready a ranged attack to 
occur when an ally strikes a particular target, and your ally 
succeeds, that target loses his Dexterity bonus to AC against 
your attack. 
 Special: A fi ghter can select Deadeye Shot as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
DEFENSIVE SWEEP
You sweep your weapon through the area you threaten, 
warding away opponents and forcing them to move away or 
suffer a fearsome blow.
    Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +15.
    Benefi  t: If an opponent begins his action adjacent to you 
and does not move, he provokes an attack of opportunity 
from you immediately after his turn ends, provided that you 
threaten the square that he occupies. Any sort of movement, 
including a 5-foot step, allows the opponent to avoid provok-
ing this special at tack of oppor t unit y. This feat does not give 
you any ability to make additional attacks of opportunity in 
a given round.
 Special:  A  fi  ghter  can  select  Defensive  Sweep  as  one  of  
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
DRIVING AT TACK
When you strike an opponent with a piercing weapon, the 
brutal impact of your strike sends him sprawling.
    Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with selected piercing weapon, 
Weapon Focus with selected piercing weapon, Weapon Mas-
tery (piercing), Weapon Specialization with selected piercing 
weapon, base attack bonus +14.
    Benefi  t:  If  you  use  a  full-round  action  to  make  a  single  
melee attack with any piercing weapon and succeed in hit-
ting, you can initiate a special bull rush attempt against the 
target. This bull rush uses your total bonus on damage rolls 
in place of your Strength modifi er. You do not provoke an 
attack  of  opportunity  with  this  bull  rush,  and  you  cannot  
move forward with your opponent.
    If you succeed in pushing an opponent back 10 feet or 
more,  you  can  reduce  the  distance  you  push  him  by  10  
feet. In return, your foe falls prone in the square where 
he ends his movement. Note that by reducing the distance 
you push your opponent, you can have him fall prone in 
his current space.
ELVEN SPELL LORE
You have studied the mighty arcane traditions of the elves, 
granting  you  insight  into  the  intricate  workings  of  magic  
and the theoretical structures behind spells.
 Prerequisites: Int 17 or elf, Knowledge (arcana) 12 
ranks.
 Benefi  t: Your understanding of the elven secrets of magic 
grants you two benefi  ts. When you cast dispel magic or greater 
dispel magic, you gain a +2 bonus on your caster level check. 
Your  understanding  of  magic  allows  you  to  more  easily  
unravel the power that sustains a foe’s spell.
    In addition, your knowledge of magic grants you rare 
insights into forgotten spell lore. Choose a single spell in your 
spellbook when you take this feat. When preparing that spell, 
620_95374_Ch3.indd   78620_95374_Ch3.indd   782/8/06   3:51:11 PM2/8/06   3:51:11 PM

79
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
you can alter the type of damage it deals to a single type of 
your choice. You must make this choice when preparing the 
spell (those who do not prepare spells cannot benefi  t  from  
this aspect of the feat). You can prepare the spell multiple 
times, selecting the same or a different energy type for it 
with each preparation.
     You can gain this feat multiple times. The caster level bonus 
does not stack, and each time you take the feat, a different 
spell must be chosen.
FADE   IN TO   V IOL E NC E
While the chaos of battle swirls around you, you rely on your 
ability to slip into the background to avoid your enemy’s 
notice. Your frightened demeanor and pitiable appearance 
causes your opponents to seek out other targets.
 Prerequisites: Bluff 6 ranks, Hide 6 ranks.
 Benefi  t: When you wear no armor or light armor and carry 
nothing in your hands, your opponents might assume that 
you are an ineffectual fi  ghter. As an immediate action, choose 
a single target for this feat. If that opponent threatens both 
you and one of your allies, that foe strikes your ally rather than 
you unless he succeeds on a Sense Motive check opposed by 
your Bluff check. If your foe is larger than you, you gain a +4 
bonus on your Bluff check. You lose this benefi  t if you attack 
any opponent or target an opponent w ith a spel l. This benefi  t  
does  not  apply  to  ranged  attacks  or  attacks  of  opportunity  
that you provoke.
    Once you choose a target for this feat, you cannot switch 
to a new target for the rest of the encounter.
FIERY FIST
By channeling your ki energy, you sheathe your limbs in 
magical fi  re. Your unarmed strikes deal extra fi  re  damage.
 Prerequisites: Dex 13, Wis 13, Improved Unarmed Strike, 
Stunning Fist, base attack bonus +8.
     Benefi  t:  As a swift action, you can expend one of your uses 
of the Stunning Fist feat to surround your fi sts and feet in 
fl  ame. For the rest of your turn, you gain an extra 1d6 points 
of fi  re damage on your unarmed strikes. 
 When you select this feat, you gain an additional dai ly use 
of Stunning Fist.
     Special:     A fi  ghter can select Fiery Fist as one of his fi  ghter  
bonus feats. A monk with the Stunning Fist feat can select 
Fiery Fist as her bonus feat at 2nd level, even if she does not 
meet the other prerequisites.
FIERY KI DEFENSE
You channel your ki energy into a cloak of fl  ame that injures 
all who attempt to strike you.
 Prerequisites: Dex  13,  Wis  13,  Fiery  Fist,  Improved  
Unarmed Strike, Stunning Fist, base attack bonus +8.
 Benefi  t:  As a swift action, you can expend one of your 
uses of the Stunning Fist feat to cloak yourself in flame. 
Any creature that strikes you with a melee attack takes 1d6 
points of fire damage. This benefit lasts until the start of 
your next turn.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Fiery Ki Defense as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats. A monk with the Stunning Fist feat can 
select Fiery Ki Defense as her bonus feat at 8th level, as long 
as she also possesses the Fiery Fist feat (other prerequisites 
can be ignored).
FLAY
When fi ghting unarmored opponents, you excel at twist-
ing your weapon just before impact. This motion rips and 
tears at your foe’s fl  esh, causing intense pain. This attack is 
wholly ineffective against armored foes, but it tears through 
natural defenses.
 Prerequisites: Str 13, Power Attack.
 Benefit: When  you  use  your  Power  Attack  feat  with  
a slashing or piercing weapon against a foe who lacks an 
armor bonus to AC, you inf lict horrid pain on your target. 
If your attack hits, your opponent must make a Fortitude 
save (DC 10 + your da mage bonus f rom Power At tack on t he 
strike). If this save fails, he takes a –2 penalty on attacks 
for 1 round.
     You can use this feat once per round against a given target.
 Special: A fighter can select Flay as one of his fighter 
bonus feats.
GRENADIER
You are skilled in using grenadelike weapons. You excel at 
tossing them to just the right spot to maximize the amount of 
damage they cause as they burst open upon the battlefi  eld.
 Benefi  t:  You  are  an  expert  with  splash  weapons  and  all  
manner of incendiary mixtures. You gain a +1 bonus on attack 
rolls  with  splash  weapons  and  a  +1  bonus  on  the  weapon’s  
damage (including splash damage).
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Grenadier as one of his fi  ghter  
bonus feats.
HINDERING OPPORTUNIST
When you have a chance to str i ke a distracted foe, you instead 
use that opportunity to aid or protect an ally against him.
    Prerequisites: Combat Refl  exes, base attack bonus +3.
    Benefi  t: Whenever an opponent provokes an attack of 
opportunity from you, you can choose to replace that attack 
with an aid another action targeting that opponent.
INTIMIDATING STRIKE
You ma ke a display of your combat prowess designed to str i ke 
terror in your foe. Your stance, attack method, and demeanor 
demonstrate to your foe that you are capable of defeating him 
with little effort. Your intent is clear—if you decide to hit 
your foe, you could easily slay him.
 Prerequisites: Intimidate 4 ranks.
 Benefi  t:  As a standard action, you make a single melee 
attack against your foe. You subtract a number from this 
attack equal to or less than your base attack bonus. If your 
attack hits, you can make an Intimidate check against the foe 
you struck, with a bonus equal to the number you subtracted 
from your at tack rol l. If this check succeeds, your opponent is 
shaken for the rest of the encounter. You cannot use this feat 
to worsen an opponent’s fear condition beyond shaken.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Intimidating Strike as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   79620_95374_Ch3.indd   792/8/06   3:51:18 PM2/8/06   3:51:18 PM

80
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
INDOMITABLE SOUL
Your  physical  toughness  translates  into  greater  mental  
resiliency. Where others cave in to magical effects that alter 
their minds, you stand resolute.
 Prerequisites: Endurance, Iron Will.
 Benefi  t: Whenever you make a Will save against a mind-
affecting or fear ability, you can roll 2d20 and use the higher 
of the two die rolls.
KEEN-EARED SCOUT
Your sharp sense of hearing allows you to determine much 
more about your surroundings. 
 Prerequisites:  Listen  6  ranks,  Alertness  or  Skill  Focus  
(Listen).
 Benefi  t: When you make a Listen check, you might learn 
more than normal about a source of noise.
     If you beat the Listen DC by 5 or more, you determine the 
size, speed, and direction of the source of noise.
     If  you  beat  the  DC  by  10  or  more,  you  determine  the  
precise, cur rent posit ion of the creat ure or object that caused 
the sound.
    If you beat the DC by 15 or more, you determine the 
type of armor the creature wears and what it carries, if 
anything.
     If you beat the DC by 20 or more, you learn the creature’s 
type and subtypes.
    The information you learn is cumulative. For example, 
if you got a Listen check result of 35 against a DC of 23, 
you gain the information for beating the check by 10 and 
by 5. These benefits apply to both standard and opposed 
Listen checks.
     Also,  you  gain  a  +5  bonus  on  Listen  checks  to  pinpoint  
invisible creatures.
KI BLAST
You focus your ki into a ball of energy that you can hurl at 
an opponent.
 Prerequisites: Dex 13, Wis 13, Fiery Fist, Improved 
Unarmed Strike, Stunning Fist, base attack bonus +8.
 Benefi  t:  You can expend two daily uses of your Stunning 
Fist feat as a move action to create an orb of raw ki energy. 
You can then throw the seething orb as a standard action 
with  a  range  of  60  feet.  This  ranged  touch  attack  deals  
damage equal to 3d6 points + your Wis modifi  er.  The  ki orb 
is a force effect.
    If you fail to throw the orb before the end of your turn, it 
dissipates harmlessly.
    When you take this feat, you gain an additional daily use 
of Stunning Fist.
     Special:     A fi  ghter can select Ki Blast as one of his fi  ghter  
bonus feats. A monk with the Stunning Fist feat can select 
Ki  Blast  as  her  bonus  feat  at  8th  level,  as  long  as  she  pos-
sesses the Fiery Fist feat and a base attack bonus of +6 (other 
prerequisites can be ignored).
LEAP OF THE HEAVENS
Your excellent athletic ability and superior conditioning 
allow you to make near-superhuman leaps.
 Prerequisite: Jump 4 ranks.
 Benefit: When making a Jump check, the DC for the 
check doesn’t double if you fail to move 20 feet in a straight 
l ine pr ior to jumping. If you do move 20 feet in a straight l ine 
before attempting a jump, you gain a +5 competence bonus 
on your check.
 Normal: All Jump checks require a 20-foot running start 
to avoid doubling the DC of the check.
LUNGING STRIKE
You make a single attack against a foe who stands just beyond 
your reach.
 Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +6.
 Benefi  t:  As  a  full-round  action,  you  can  make  a  single  
str i ke w ith a 5-foot bonus to your at tack ’s reach. This benefi  t  
applies to both armed and unarmed attacks, including touch 
attacks made to deliver spells. 
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Lunging Strike as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
LURKING FAMILIAR
Your familiar hides within the folds of your robe or takes 
cover  behind  you  as  your  opponents  close  in.  When  it  
moves to attack, its sudden appearance might catch your 
foe by surprise.
 Prerequisites: Combat Familiar, arcane caster level 6th, 
familiar.
 Benefi  t: If your familiar occupies your square, it gains 
cover against all attacks. As a consequence, it can make a 
Hide check to avoid your foe’s notice. If your familiar then 
leaves your space to attack an opponent, it gains the normal 
benefi  t for attacking from a hidden position.
MAD FOAM RAGER
You fight with the rage that only a rabid badger or a beer-
addled dwarf can bring to bear. In combat, you shrug off 
attacks  and  continue  fi  ghting  even  in  the  face  of  horrifi  c  
injuries and effects.
 Prerequisite: Rage or frenzy ability.
 Benefit: When fighting, you can endure tremendous 
blows with little visible effect. As an immediate action, 
you can choose to delay the effect of a single attack, spell, 
or ability used against you. The damage or effect does not 
take hold until the end of your next turn. You can only use 
this ability while under the effect of your rage or frenzy 
ability. You can activate it once every time you use your rage 
or frenzy ability.
MASTER MANIPULATOR
Your words are your weapons. You confuse others with your 
speech,  luring  them  into  giving  up  vital  secrets  and  leav-
ing them dumbfounded with your carefully constructed, 
conversational static.
 Prerequisites: Cha 13, Diplomacy 9 ranks.
 Benefit: This feat grants two new uses for the Diplo-
macy  skill.  You  must  share  a  language  with  a  creature  
to use these options against it. Neither ability functions 
during combat.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   80620_95374_Ch3.indd   802/8/06   3:51:25 PM2/8/06   3:51:25 PM

81
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
Captivating  Speech:  You  can  distract  a  creature  with  your  
compelling delivery and witticisms. With a successful Diplo-
macy check opposed by the target’s own Diplomacy check 
or Will save, you can impose a –4 penalty on 
the target’s Listen, Sense Motive, and Spot 
checks so long as you continue spea king. 
You can affect a number of targets equal 
to 1 + your Cha bonus (if any), 
as long as they are all within 
20 feet.
 Trap  o f  Wo r ds : If a crea-
ture  attempts  and  fails  
to  successfully  to  use  
Bluff to lie to you, you 
skillfully maneuver the 
conversation to confuse 
the  target  or  trick  him  
into  letting  slip  a  vital  
clue. After succeeding on 
your Sense Motive check, 
you can then engage the 
target in conversation for 
at least 1 minute. At the 
end  of  this  time,  make  
a  Diplomacy  check  op-
posed by the target’s Bluff 
check. If you succeed, the 
target  inadvertently  re-
veals his lie and the reason 
behind it. 
MELEE 
EVASION
You r  speed,  ag i l it y,  
and  talent  for  intel-
ligent  fighting  allow  
you to avoid your oppo-
nent’s  blows.  You  take  
careful stock of an oppo-
nent and slip away from his sword blow just as he commits 
to the attack.
Prerequisites:  Dex  13,  Int  13,  Combat  Expertise,  
Dodge.
Benefi  t:  While  fi  ghting  defensively,  you  can  attempt  to  
negate a single attack made by the target of your Dodge feat. 
If this opponent attacks you, use an immediate action to 
make a d20 roll modifi  ed by your highest base attack bonus. 
The result is used as your normal AC and touch AC against 
that single, specifi  c attack from your opponent. You cannot 
use  this  feat  if  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  does  not  apply  
against your opponent’s attack.
Special: A fi ghter can select Melee Evasion as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
MELEE WEAPON MASTERY
You have mastered a wide range of weapons. Your training 
with one specifi c weapon now extends to other weapons of 
a similar sort.
 Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with selected weapon, Weapon 
Focus with selected weapon, Weapon Specialization with 
selected weapon, base attack bonus +8.
Benefi  t: When you select this feat, choose bludgeoning, 
piercing, or slashing. You must have Weapon Focus and 
Weapon Specialization with a melee weapon that deals this 
type of damage. When using any melee weapon that has the 
damage type you selected, you gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls 
and a +2 bonus on damage rolls.
Special: You can select this feat more than once. Each 
time, you can select a new damage type.
          A     fi ghter can choose Melee Weapon Mastery as one 
of his fi  ghter bonus feats.
OVERWHELMING ASSAULT
If you attack a foe who does nothing to turn 
aside  your  attack,  you  press  
forward with an indom-
itable  strike.  Only  a  
fool ignores the deadly 
threat you present.
     Prerequisite: Base 
attack bonus +15.
     Benefi  t:  As  a  free  
action, designate one 
specific  foe  as  the  
target of this feat. If 
this  foe  begins  his  
turn adjacent to you, 
ends  his  turn  still  
adjacent to you, and 
does  not  attack  you,  
target you with a spell, 
or use a special ability 
against  you,  you  gain  
a  +4  bonus  on  melee  
attack rolls against him 
on your next turn.
PENETR ATING SHOT
You send a powerful shot cleaving through your enemies.
Prerequisites:  Str  15,  Point  Blank  Shot,  base  attack  
bonus +10.
Benefit: When you make a ranged attack with a pro-
jectile weapon (such as a bow, crossbow, or sling), you 
can instead choose to unleash a single, mighty attack that 
blasts through multiple opponents. This attack requires a 
standard action, and your shot takes the form of a 60-foot 
l ine. Ma ke a separate at tack rol l against each creat ure in the 
line. If struck, creatures along this line take damage from 
your shot, though any extra damage (such as from a sneak 
attack or a fl  aming weapon) is applied only against the fi  rst  
creature struck.
Special: A  fi  ghter  can  select  Penetrating  Shot  as  one  of  
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
A halfl ing uses Master Manipulator 
to catch a human in a lie
Illus. by S. Belledin
620_95374_Ch3.indd   81620_95374_Ch3.indd   812/8/06   3:51:31 PM2/8/06   3:51:31 PM

82
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
RANGED WEAPON MASTERY
You have mastered a wide range of weapons. Your training 
with one specifi c weapon now extends to other weapons of 
a similar sort.
 Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with selected weapon, Weapon 
Focus with selected weapon, Weapon Specialization with 
selected weapon, base attack bonus +8.
 Benefi  t: When you select this feat, choose bludgeoning, 
piercing, or slashing. You must have Weapon Focus and 
Weapon Specialization with a ranged weapon that deals 
this type of damage. When using any ranged weapon that 
has the damage type you selected, you gain a +2 bonus on 
attacks and a +2 bonus on damage. In addition, you increase 
its range increment by 20 feet.
 Special: You can select this feat more than once. Each 
time, you can select a new damage type.
    A    fi ghter can choose Ranged Weapon Mastery as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
RAPID BLITZ
You charge across the battlefi  eld, combining your speed and 
fi  ghting ability to move and attack with unmatched skill.
    Prerequisites: Dex 13, Bounding Assault, Dodge, Mobil-
ity, Spring Attack, base attack bonus +18.
    Benefi  t: You can designate a third target for your Spring 
Attack feat. In addition to the second attack you gain from 
your Bounding Assault feat, you can make a third attack 
with a –10 penalty.
ROBILAR’S GAMBIT
By offering Robilar’s Gambit, you absorb damage to place 
yourself in an advantageous position. This dangerous sacrifi  ce  
is not for the unfi t or the unwise, for one failed retaliatory 
strike can undo the advantage gained. Lord Robilar, a rash 
and  impetuous  fi  ghter,  gained  fame  using  this  technique  
against his enemies.
 Prerequisites: Combat Refl  exes, base attack bonus +12.
 Benefit:  At  the  start  of  your  action,  you  can  adopt  a  
fi ghting stance that exposes you to harm but allows you to 
ta ke advantage of your opponents’ ex posed defenses as they 
reach in to attack you. Anyone who strikes at you gains a 
+4 bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls against you. In 
return, they provoke attacks of opportunity from you each 
time they swing. Resolve your attack of opportunity after 
your foe’s attack.
 Normal: Opponents do not provoke attacks of opportunity 
by at tacking. Fur ther, when an opponent provokes an at tack 
of opportunity, you resolve your attack before he completes 
the action that provoked the attack of opportunity.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Robilar’s Gambit as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
SHIELD SLING
You can hurl your shield as a deadly missile, turning it from 
a defensive item to a crushing, thrown weapon.
 Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with shields, Improved Shield 
Bash, Shield Specialization, base attack bonus +9.
 Benefi  t: You can wield your light shield or heavy shield 
as a thrown weapon with a range increment of 20 feet. The 
shield deals damage as normal for its size (see Table 7–5, PH 
116), and you gain your Strength bonus on damage as normal 
for  a  thrown  weapon.  In  addition,  you  can  make  a  ranged  
touch attack to initiate a trip attempt. Your target resists the 
trip attempt as normal. You lose your size bonus (though not 
a size penalty) on your Strength check. If your foe’s check 
succeeds, he cannot attempt to trip you.
     You cannot throw a tower shield. You can throw a buckler, 
but it does no damage, and you cannot use it to trip an 
opponent.
 Special: A fi ghter can select Shield Sling as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
SHIELD SPECIALIZATION
You are skilled in using a shield, allowing you to gain greater 
defensive benefi  ts  from  it.
 Prerequisite: Profi  ciency  with  shields.
 Benefi  t: Choose one t y pe of shield from the fol low ing l ist: 
buckler, heavy, or light. When using a shield of the appropri-
ate type, you increase its shield bonus to AC by 1.
 Special: You can ta ke this feat more than once. Each time 
you select it, choose a different type of shield.
    A    fi  ghter  can  select  Shield  Specialization  as  one  of  his  
fi  ghter bonus feats.
SHIELD WARD
You use your shield like a wall of steel and wood. When an 
opponent at tempts to draw in close to you, your shield forces 
him away or ruins his attacks.
 Prerequisite:   Proficiency   with   shields,   Shield   
Specialization.
 Benefi  t: You apply your shield bonus to your touch AC, 
and  on  checks  or  rolls  to  resist  bull  rush,  disarm,  grapple,  
overrun, or trip attempts against you.
 Special: A  fi  ghter  can  select  Shield  Ward  as  one  of  his  
fi  ghter bonus feats.
SHORT HAFT
You  have  trained  in  polearm  fi  ghting  alongside  your  com-
rades in arms, sometimes reaching past them while they 
shield you, and sometimes shielding them while they attack 
from behind you.
 Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with a reach weapon, We a p o n  
Focus with a reach weapon, base attack bonus +3.
 Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can choose to lose the ben-
efi  t of wielding any reach weapon other than a spiked chain 
or a whip. In return, you can use that weapon to threaten 
and attack spaces adjacent to you. With another swift action, 
you can give up this feat’s benefi t in order to regain the use 
of your weapon’s superior reach.
     Special:     A fi  ghter can select Short Haft as one of his fi  ghter  
bonus feats.
SLASHING FLURRY
You swing your weapon with uncanny speed, slicing apart a 
foe in the blink of an eye.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   82620_95374_Ch3.indd   822/8/06   3:51:40 PM2/8/06   3:51:40 PM

83
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
    Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with selected slashing weapon, 
Weapon Focus with selected slashing weapon, Weapon Mas-
tery (slashing), Weapon Specialization with selected slashing 
weapon, base attack bonus +14.
    Benefi  t: When you use a standard action to attack with 
any slashing weapon, you can choose to make a second attack 
with that weapon. You take a –5 penalty on the fi  rst  attack,  
and a –10 penalty on the second.
     When  you  use  a  full  attack  action  with  any  slashing  
weapon, you gain one additional attack at your highest base 
attack bonus. That attack and all other attacks you make in 
the current round take a –5 penalty.
SPECTR AL SKIRMISHER
You have trained extensively in the use of magic that renders 
you invisible. In combat, you use this experience to vex your 
opponents and increase your survivability.
 Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +6.
 Benefit: While you are invisible, you gain additional 
benefi  ts. Creatures unable to see you due to invisibility take 
a –5 penalty on all Listen checks to detect you. A creature 
using a melee attack against the square you occupy provokes 
an at tack of oppor t unit y from you. You must choose to ma ke 
this attack before checking to see if the creature fi  nds  you.  
If you attack and hit, the creature automatically fi  nds  you  in  
your square. See page 152 of the Player’s Handbook and page 
295 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide for the effects of invisibility 
on combat.
 Special: A fi ghter can select Spectral Skirmisher as one 
of his fi  ghter  bonus  feats.
SPELL-LINKED FAMILIAR
You and your familiar can share spell energy, allowing your 
familiar to cast a limited number of spells each day.
 Prerequisites: Arcane caster level 9th, familiar.
 Benefi  t: Your familiar can cast spells that you grant to it. 
A familiar gains spells based on your arcane caster level, and 
any spells granted to your familiar are subtracted from your 
daily allotment.
     The maximum number of spells of a certain level that you 
can grant to your familiar is given on the table below. For 
example, as a 16th-level arcane caster, you can grant your 
familiar as many as three 0-level spells, two 1st-level spells, 
and one 2nd-level spell.
     ———Spell Level ———
Caster Level 0 1st 2nd
9th–11th                1                  —                 —
12th–14th              2              1                  —
15th–17th               3               2               1
18th–20th                   4                   3                   2
The familiar uses 1/2 your caster level as its caster level. It 
cannot cast spells that have a gp or XP cost, or that require 
a  focus.  A  familiar  does  not  need  somatic,  material,  or  
verbal components to cast a spell that was granted to it by 
this feat.
STALWART DEFENSE
You excel at aiding your allies in battle. When an opponent 
attempts to strike one of them, you make a quick, distracting 
motion to ruin the foe’s efforts.
    Prerequisites: Combat Refl  exes, Hindering Opportunist, 
base attack bonus +9.
     Benefi  t: When an opponent you threaten attempts a melee 
attack against one of your allies, you can give up one of your 
attacks of opportunity to attempt an aid another action. You 
target  the  attacking  opponent  with  the  aid  another.  The  
target of your foe’s attack gains the benefi  t of your action in 
the form of a +2 bonus to AC against the attempted attack. 
You cannot use this feat against the same opponent more 
than once per round.
STEADFAST DETERMINATION
Your physical durability allows you to shrug off attacks that 
would cripple a lesser person. Rather than depend on agility 
or willpower, you use your raw toughness to survive.
 Prerequisites: Endurance.
 Benefi  t: You can use your Constitution modifi  er in place 
of your Wisdom modifi  er on Will saves.
    You do not automatically fail Fortitude saves on a roll of 
natural 1.
TELLING BLOW
When you strike an opponent’s vital areas, you draw on 
your ability to land crippling blows to make the most of 
your attack.
 Prerequisite: Skirmish or sneak attack ability.
 Benefi  t: When you score a critical hit against a target, you 
deal your skirmish or sneak attack damage in addition to 
the damage from your critical hit. Your critical multiplier 
applies only to your normal damage, not your skirmish or 
sneak attack damage. This benefit affects both melee and 
ranged attacks.
TROPHY COLLECTOR
A belt of minotaur fur, a hood of cloaker wing-skin, and an 
amulet fashioned from a petrifi  ed dragon’s eye—these are 
the intimidating symbols of your trade. You are skilled in 
preserving portions of defeated enemies and turning them 
into trophies. The memor y of your past accompl ishments 
drives you onward, instilling in you the confi  dence  needed  
to face still greater foes.
 Prerequisite: Craft (taxidermy) 6 ranks.
 Benefi  t: When you defeat a foe in combat, you can preserve 
a part of its body and create a trophy that you can wear or 
brandish. In order to be wor thy of your ef for ts, the opponent 
must have a CR greater than your current level.
     A  trophy  has  a  value  equal  to  the  defeated  creature’s  CR  
× 100 gp. You must spend time using the Craft (taxidermy) 
skill to create the trophy as normal. Once you create a trophy, 
you can sell it for its market price or wear it. When you create 
a trophy, you must design it to occupy space on your body 
as one of these kinds of magic items: amulet, belt, boots, or 
cloak. You cannot gain the benefi  t of both a magic item and 
a trophy i f both occupy the same space on your body; in such 
620_95374_Ch3.indd   83620_95374_Ch3.indd   832/8/06   3:51:47 PM2/8/06   3:51:47 PM

84
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
a case, the object you donned last becomes functional and 
the other object does not work.
     While wearing a trophy, you gain a +2 bonus on Intimidate 
checks per trophy against creatures of the same type as the 
trophy,  except  for  outsiders  and  humanoids.  In  these  two  
cases, the target must share the same subtype as the creature 
from which you crafted the trophy. You take a -–4 penalty 
on Diplomacy checks against creatures of the 
same t y pe or subt y pe as one or more of your 
worn trophies.
     For  each  trophy  you  wear,  
you gain a +1 bonus on 
saves  against  fear  ef-
fects.  Once  per  day,  
you gain a morale bo-
nus  on  a  single  Will  
save  equal  to  the  num-
ber of trophies you wear. 
In  this  case,  you  draw  
upon  the  memories  of  past  
victories to strengthen your re-
solve. If you choose to take 
this  morale  bonus  on  a  
save against a fear ef-
fect,  it  stacks  with  
the usual +1 bonus 
on  saves  per  tro-
phy worn. 
Special:  You  
can  only  craft  
trophies from cor-
poreal  creatures  that  
you actively helped de-
feat.  You  cannot  craft  
trophies from oozes. 
TUMBLING FEINT
When  you  move  near  an  opponent,  your  acrobatic  ma-
neuvers leave him confused and unable to properly defend 
himself.
Prerequisites: Bluff 4 ranks, Tumble 4 ranks.
Benefi  t:  As  a  swift  action  at  the  start  of  your  turn,  you  
designate a single opponent as the target of this feat. If you 
successfully use your Tumble skill to avoid provoking an 
attack of opportunity from that opponent, you gain a +5 bonus 
on your next Bluff check to feint against him. You must use 
this benefi  t on or before your next turn.
     For example, Lidda designates a nearby ogre as the target 
of this feat. She tumbles into the ogre’s threatened area and 
continues to tumble past the creature, moving to a square 
from which she plans to make a melee attack against the ogre. 
Lidda succeeds on her Tumble check to avoid provoking an 
attack of opportunity from the ogre, and she moves into her 
destination square. She can now use a standard action to feint 
the ogre, applying the benefi  t of this feat on her Bluff check, 
or she can take any other sort of standard action, including 
making a normal melee attack against the ogre. If she chooses 
not  to  feint  immediately,  she  can  wait  until  her  next  turn  
and still gain this feat’s benefi t.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Tumbling Feint as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
TWO-WEAPON 
POUNCE
When  you  charge  an  
opponent while wield-
ing two weapons, 
you can make two 
quick attacks. You 
trade the momen-
tum and power of 
the  charge  for  the  
opportunity to use your sec-
ond weapon.
Prerequisites: Dex 15,
Two-Weapon Fighting, base 
attack bonus +6.
  Benefi  t:  When you are 
making a charge and wield-
ing weapons in both hands, 
you  can  attack  with  both  of  
your  weapons.  If  you  do  so,  
you lose the bonus on attack rolls 
normally granted by a charge. The 
–2 penalty to AC from charging 
still applies.
Normal: When  making  a  
charge, you get a single attack at 
the end of your movement.
  Special:  A  fighter  can  
select  Two-Weapon  Pounce  
as one of his fi  ghter bonus feats. 
A ranger who has chosen the two-
weapon combat style can select Two-Weapon 
Pounce as long as he has a base attack bonus of +6 and is 
wearing light armor or no armor.
TWO-WEAPON REND
You  wield  two  weapons  with  an  artisan’s  precision.  Each  
strike builds on the next, allowing you to deal more damage.
Prerequisites: Dex 15, Two-Weapon Fighting, base attack 
bonus +11.
Benefi  t:  If  you  successfully  hit  an  opponent  with  both  
of  the  weapons  you  wield,  you  deal  extra  damage  equal  to  
1d6  +  1-1/2  times  your  Strength  bonus.  This  extra  damage  
is treated as the same type that your off-hand weapon deals 
normally for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction 
and other effects related to damage type. You can gain this 
extra damage once per round against a given opponent.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Two-Weapon Rend as one of 
his fi ghter bonus feats. A ranger who has chosen the two-
weapon combat style can select Two-Weapon Rend as long as 
he has a base attack bonus of +11 and is wearing light armor 
or no armor.
Soveliss dispatches a red slaad twice 
as fast by using Two-Weapon Rend
Illus. by R. Spencer
620_95374_Ch3.indd   84620_95374_Ch3.indd   842/8/06   3:51:53 PM2/8/06   3:51:53 PM

85
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
VAT IC   G A Z E
Your arcane studies have brought forth your nascent talent 
to sense magical auras and the power that others are capable 
of wielding.
 Prerequisite: Arcane caster level 9th.
 Benefi  t: You can use detect magic at will.
     Also,  as  a  swift  action,  you  can  attempt  to  determine  an  
opponent’s spellcasting ability. You make a Sense Motive 
check (DC 5 + target’s caster level). If this check succeeds, 
you  learn  the  highest-level  spells  the  target  is  capable  of  
casting. This benefi  t grants you no insight into spell-like or 
supernatural abilities.
VERSATILE UNARMED STRIKE
You  employ  a  variety  of  unarmed  fi  ghting  styles,  allowing  
you to alter the type of damage your attacks deal.
 Prerequisite: Improved Unarmed Strike.
 Benefi  t:  As a swift action, you can opt for your unarmed 
strikes to deal your choice of bludgeoning, piercing, or 
slashing damage. Once you make this choice, your unarmed 
strikes continue to deal the chosen damage type until you 
use another swift action to change it.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Versatile Unarmed Strike as 
one of his fi  ghter bonus feats.
VEXING FLANKER
You excel at picking apart an opponent’s defenses when your 
allies also threaten him.
 Prerequisite: Combat Refl  exes.
 Benefi  t:  You  gain  a  +4  bonus  on  your  attack  rolls  when  
fl  anking.
 Normal: Flanking grants a +2 bonus on attack rolls.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Vexing Flanker as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
WANDERER’S DIPLOMACY
Many halfl  ings journey far and wide across the world, spend-
ing no more than a few months in one place. You have spent 
time among the halfl  ings, or you are a halfl  ing yourself. Your 
exposure  to  that  race’s  nomadic  way  of  life  has  taught  you  
several useful methods of dealing with strangers.
 Prerequisites: Halfl ing or 4 ranks in Bluff, Diplomacy, 
and Sense Motive.
 Benefi  t: You excel in using your words and wit to make 
your way in the world. This feat grants you three separate 
abilities. 
 Canny Merchant: You can make a Diplomacy check to track 
down an item that is normally too expensive to be purchased 
in the town or settlement where you are currently located. 
The DC of this check is 10 + (the item’s gp cost minus the 
community’s gp limit, divided by 1,000). If this check suc-
ceeds, you learn of a merchant who can supply the item to 
you. You must still purchase it as normal.
 Intuitive  Communication:  When  you  are  faced  with  a  
creature whose language you do not understand, you can 
at tempt to communicate w ith it by ma king a successful Sense 
Motive check. This check requires that you spend at least 1 
minute listening to the creature and watching its gestures 
and demeanor. The check’s base DC is 20. If the creature is 
not the same type as you, the DC is 30.
     With  a  successful  check,  you  learn  the  basic  gist  of  the  
creature’s speech. This ability gives you no special talent to 
speak the creature’s tongue.
 Social Agility: You can temporarily alter a creature’s attitude 
toward you. You can use Bluff against an unfriendly or less 
hostile creature in the same way you use Diplomacy. Using 
Blu f f in this manner is a standard action that ta kes no special 
penalties. The target’s attitude remains changed for 1 minute. 
After this time, it becomes one grade more hostile than where 
it started for 10 minutes.
WATER SPLITTING STONE
You channel your ki energy to splinter the defenses of crea-
tures whose tough hides or magical natures normally allow 
them to shrug off your blows.
 Prerequisite: Dex 13, Wis 13, Improved Unarmed Strike, 
Stunning Fist, base attack bonus +9.
 Benefi  t:  You gain a +4 bonus on damage rolls when you 
make an unarmed strike against an opponent whose damage 
reduction is effective against your unarmed strikes. This feat’s 
benefi  t does not apply against a target if its damage reduction 
does not apply to your attacks. For example, a monk with ki 
strike (adamantine) does not gain the bonus on damage rolls 
against a foe with damage reduction that affects attacks with 
adamantine weapons.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Water Splitting Stone as one 
of his fi ghter bonus feats. A monk with the Stunning Fist 
feat can select Water Splitting Stone as long as she has a base 
attack bonus +9 (other prerequisites can be ignored).
WEAPON SUPREMACY
You are a grandmaster in the use of your chosen weapon. When 
you hold it in your hands, no foe can stand against you.
    Prerequisites: Profi  ciency with selected weapon, Greater 
Weapon Focus with selected weapon, Greater Weapon Spe-
cialization with selected weapon, Weapon Focus with selected 
weapon,  Weapon  Specialization  with  selected  weapon,  
Weapon Mastery with damage type of selected weapon, 
fi  ghter level 18th.
    Benefi  t: When fi  ghting with the weapon that you choose 
for this feat, you gain a number of additional advantages.
     You  gain  a  +4  bonus  on  all  checks  made  to  resist  being  
disarmed.
     You can wield your weapon against a foe who grapples you 
without penalty and without fi  rst making a grapple check. In 
this situation, you can take a standard action or a full attack 
action as normal.
     When  you  take  a  full  attack  action,  you  can  apply  a  +5  
bonus to any single attack after your fi  rst  strike.
     Once  per  round  before  making  an  attack  roll,  you  can  
instead choose to treat your d20 result as a 10.
    You gain a +1 bonus to AC.
    Special: You can choose this feat only once, for a single 
specific  kind  of  weapon.  The  dedication  and  focus  it  
requires makes it impossible to gain this feat for more 
than one weapon.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   85620_95374_Ch3.indd   852/8/06   3:52:02 PM2/8/06   3:52:02 PM

86
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
CEREMONY FEATS
A  ceremony  feat  grants  you  the  knowledge  and  training  
needed  to  complete  several  specifi  c  ceremonies.  Each  feat  
uses the Knowledge (religion) skill to gauge the depth of your 
study. As you gain more ranks in that skill, the ceremonies 
available through the feat increase.
    A creature can benefi t from one ceremony at a time. If 
you attempt a second ceremony on the same creature, the 
fi  rst ceremony’s benefi ts immediately end and the second 
ceremony applies.
     Each  ceremony  has  a  cost  in  time  and  resources.  The  
ceremony consumes the materials needed for it when it ends 
(not  when  the  benefi  t  ends).  If  the  ceremony  is  disrupted,  
such as i f an opponent at tacks before you fi  nish, the material 
components are not lost.
    The two feats described below are ceremony feats. Their 
prerequisites and benefi  ts are summarized on Table 3–2.
RITUAL BLESSING
You call upon the powers of goodness and light to bless your 
allies. If your religious studies are advanced enough, the 
rituals you learn allow you to ward against illness or poison, 
enhance your healing abilities, and protect against evil.
 Prerequisites: Good alignment, Knowledge (religion) 
4 ranks.
 Benefi  t: You gain access to rituals based on your ranks in 
Knowledge (religion).
 Anoint (Knowledge [religion] 4 ranks): You speak a blessing 
over the recipient of this ritual, anoint him with holy water, 
and say a short prayer for him. When you cast a cure spell on 
the recipient, he heals an extra 2 points of damage.
    Performing this ritual requires 5 minutes of incantation 
and a vial of holy water. Its effects last for 24 hours.
 Cleanse (Knowledge [religion] 8 ranks): You spr i n k le holy 
water over the recipient of this ritual and speak a prayer to 
his health and vigor. The target gains a +2 bonus on saves 
against disease and poison.
     Performing this ritual requires 10 minutes of incantation 
and a vial of holy water. Its effects last for 24 hours.
 Ward (Knowledge [religion] 13 ranks): You use a special combi-
nation of powdered silver and holy water to create a mystical 
ward that offers protection against demons and devils. The 
recipient of this ritual gains a +1 bonus on saves against spells 
and special attacks used by evil outsiders.
     Performing this ritual requires 10 minutes of work, a vial 
of  holy  water,  and  powdered  silver  worth  30  gp.  Its  effects  
last for 24 hours.
RITUAL BLOOD BONDS
You invest your allies with the mighty power of your totem, 
god, or similar divine entity. These rituals allow you to forge 
bonds between warriors that stand the test of combat.
 Prerequisites: Orc or half-orc, Knowledge (religion) 
4 ranks.
 Benefi  t:  You  gain  access  to  rituals  based  on  your  total  
ranks in Knowledge (religion).
 Blood Brothers (Knowledge [religion] 4 ranks): You gat her up 
to six of your allies together in a circle. Each member of this 
circle pledges allegiance to the others, cuts himself, and 
bleeds into a bowl containing holy water or unholy water 
(as appropriate to your alignment). You then sprinkle this 
mixture on yourself and the members of the circle. You and 
ever yone else who par ticipated in this r it ual gains a + 4 morale 
bonus on Will saves against fear as long as each individual 
can see one other ally who took part in this ritual.
    This ritual requires 10 minutes of incantation and a vial 
of holy water or unholy water. Its effect lasts for 24 hours.
 Vengeful Bonds of Brotherhood (Knowledge [religion] 8 ranks): 
You create a close, mystical bond between you and your 
allies.  Up  to  six  individuals  can  participate  with  you  in  
this  ritual.  Each  participant  cuts  his  hand.  Everyone  in  
the  ritual  then  clasps  hands  in  a  circle  while  you  stand  
in the middle. You speak a prayer while sprinkling holy 
or unholy water on each participant. This ritual grants a 
benefit to its participants (including you) when an ally 
falls  in  battle.  If  an  individual  who  participated  in  this  
ritual sees another participant drop to 0 or fewer hit points 
due to an opponent’s actions, he gains a +2 morale bonus 
on attack rolls against the foe who dropped his ally. The 
benefit lasts for 1 minute every time it is triggered. You can 
gain this bonus against multiple foes dur ing the duration 
of the effect.
    This ritual requires 10 minutes of incantation, a vial of 
holy water or unholy water, and silver dust worth 10 gp. The 
ritual’s benefi  t lasts for 24 hours.
COMBAT FOR M F E AT S
While most warriors draw on their strength, agility, and 
toughness in battle, a few learn to tap into the true poten-
tial of their minds. Somewhat like a monk, such a warrior 
supplements  his  physical  practice  with  rigorous  mental  
training to hone his fi  ghting abilities. His mind and body 
become one as he fi  ghts, allowing him to achieve unparal-
leled levels of combat mastery. Being in this state of perfect 
mental and physical harmony is known as maintaining a 
combat focus. (Taking the feat called Combat Focus is how 
a  character  learns  to  achieve  this  state;  all  other  combat  
form feats have Combat Focus as a prerequisite.) The task 
of maintaining a combat focus is both diffi  cult and strain-
ing. Thus, a warrior cannot remain in this state for long. 
While he does, however, he can use any combat form feats 
he possesses.
     The six feats described below are combat form feats. Their 
prerequisites and benefi  ts are summarized on Table 3–3.
COMBAT AWARENESS
When you maintain your combat focus, you have an uncanny 
ability to sense the ebb and fl  ow of your opponents’ vitality. 
As you attain greater mastery of this fi  ghting style, you learn 
to sense a foe’s presence even with your eyes closed.
 Prerequisites: Wis 13, Blind-Fight, Combat Focus, base 
attack bonus +12.
 Benefit:  While  maintaining  your  combat  focus,  you  
learn the current hit point total of each adjacent opponent 
and ally.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   86620_95374_Ch3.indd   862/8/06   3:52:08 PM2/8/06   3:52:08 PM

87
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
    If you have three or more combat form feats, you gain 
blindsight out to 5 feet.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Combat Awareness as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
COMBAT DEFENSE
The state of keen focus and mental discipline you attain in 
combat allows you to shift the focus of your defense from one 
opponent to another with careful, precise maneuvers.
 Prerequisites: Dex 13, Wis 13, Combat Focus, Dodge, 
base attack bonus +6.
 Benefi  t: While you maintain your combat focus, you can 
change the target of your Dodge feat to a new opponent as 
an immediate action.
    If you have three or more combat form feats, you gain an 
additional +1 dodge bonus to AC against the target of your 
Dodge feat.
 Normal: Designating or chang ing the target of your Dodge 
feat can only be done on your turn as a free action.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Combat Defense as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
COMBAT FOCUS
The way of the warrior requires more than simple, brute 
strength. Some warriors bring their minds to such keen 
focus during the heat of battle that they can attain superhu-
man levels of endurance, perception, and mental toughness. 
Through intense mental exercise and training, you learn to 
enter a state of perfect martial clarity.
    Prerequisite: Wis 13.
 Benefit: In battle, you push aside the chaos of the fight 
and  attain  a  focused  state  that  grants  you  a  keen,  clear  
picture of the battle. Fear and pain ebb away as you focus 
solely on defeating your enemy. The first time you make 
a successful attack during an encounter, you gain your 
combat focus. In this state, your mind and body become 
one, allowing you to overcome mundane physical limits. 
You can maintain your combat focus for 10 rounds after 
entering it, +1 additional round per combat form feat you 
possess aside from this one. You can only gain your combat 
focus once per encounter.
    While you are maintaining your combat focus, you gain 
a +2 bonus on Will saves. If you have three or more combat 
form feats, this bonus increases to +4.
 Special: A fi ghter can select Combat Focus as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
COMBAT STABILIT Y
When you maintain your combat focus, you become diffi  cult  
to dislodge. Your muscles lock into an unyielding position, 
granting you superior ability to resist trip attacks, bull rushes, 
disarms, and similar effects.
 Prerequisite: Wis 13, Combat Focus, base attack bonus +3.
 Benefi  t:  You gain a +4 bonus on checks or rolls to resist 
bull rush, disarm, grapple, overrun, and trip attempts made 
against you.
    If you have three or more combat form feats, the bonus 
granted by this feat increases to +8.
 Special: A  fi  ghter  can  select  Combat  Stability  as  one  of  
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
COMBAT STRIKE
Your intense, focused state allows you to see the one criti-
cal moment in a battle when you hang suspended between 
victory  and  defeat.  By  pouring  the  energy  required  to  
maintain your focus into your assault, you bat ter through 
your foe’s defenses.
 Prerequisites: Wis  13, Combat  Focus,  any  two  other  
combat form feats, base attack bonus +15.
 Benefi  t: If you choose to end your combat focus as a sw i ft 
action, you gain a bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls equal 
to your total number of combat for m feats for the rest of your 
current turn. You immediately lose all benefits of combat 
form  feats  that  affect  you  only  while  you  are  maintaining  
your combat focus.
 Special: A fi ghter can select Combat Strike as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
Table 3–2: Ceremony Feats
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
Ritual Blessing Good alignment,   Gain warding rituals
 Knowledge (religion) 4 ranks
Ritual Blood Bonds Orc or half-orc,  Gain toughening rituals
 Knowledge (religion) 4 ranks
Table 3–3: Combat Form Feats
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
Combat Focus Wis 13 Enter meditative state to gain +2 bonus on Will saves
   Combat Stability Wis 13, Combat Focus,  +4 against bull rush, disarm, grapple, overrun, and trip
 base attack bonus +3
   Combat Defense Dex 13, Wis 13, Combat Focus, Dodge,  Change target of Dodge feat as immediate action
 base attack bonus +6
   Combat Vigor Wis 13, Combat Focus,  While in focus, gain fast healing 2
 base attack bonus +9
   Combat Awareness Wis 13, Blind-Fight, Combat Focus,  Learn hit point totals of all adjacent creatures
 base attack bonus +12
   Combat Strike Wis 13, Combat Focus, Expend combat focus to gain bonus on attacks 
 any two other combat form feats,  and damage
 base attack bonus +15
620_95374_Ch3.indd   87620_95374_Ch3.indd   872/8/06   3:52:15 PM2/8/06   3:52:15 PM

88
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
COMBAT VIGOR
When you maintain your combat focus, your clarity of purpose 
and relentless drive allow you to overcome your body’s frailties. 
Minor wounds heal in a matter of seconds, and you quickly 
recover from even a grievous blow.
Prerequisites:  Wis  13,  Combat  
Focus, base attack bonus +9.
Benefit: While you maintain your 
combat focus, you gain fast healing 2. 
You lose this benefit when your combat 
focus ends.
    If you have three or more combat form 
feats, the benefi  t of this feat improves to fast 
healing 4.
Special: A fi ghter can select Combat 
Vigor as one of his fi  ghter  bonus  feats.
DIVINE FEATS 
Divine feats are the province of 
those  who  are  able  to  turn  or  
rebuke  undead.  Instead  of  at-
tempting  to  affect  an  undead  
creature,  you  expend  a  turn  
or rebuke undead attempt to 
trigger the benefi  t of a divine 
feat you have. You can activate 
only one divine feat per round, 
though overlapping durations 
might allow you the benefi  ts  of  
more than one divine feat at 
a time. Activating a divine 
feat is a super nat ural abi l-
ity, requires a type of 
action or an amount 
of  time  depending  on  
the feat, and does not 
provoke  attacks  of  
opportunity unless 
otherwise noted in 
the  feat  descrip-
tion. Activating a 
divine  feat  is  not  
considered  an  at-
tack  unless  doing  so  
would  directly  cause  
damage to a target.
     The eight feats described 
below are divine feats. Their 
prerequisites and benefi  ts  are  sum-
marized on Table 3–4.
DIVINE ARMOR
You  call  upon  your  deity  to  protect  you  in  your  hour  of  
need by wreathing you in divine power that wards off your 
enemies’ attacks.
    Prerequisites: Divine caster level 5th, ability to turn or 
rebuke undead.
     Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can expend a turn or rebuke 
undead attempt to gain damage reduction 5/– until the start 
of your next turn.
DIVINE FORTUNE
With a quick prayer, you channel divine energy to help resist 
a spell, poison, or other deadly effect.
    Prerequisites: Divine caster level 5th, ability to turn or 
rebuke undead.
    Benefi  t: As an immediate action, you can expend a turn 
or rebuke undead attempt to gain a +4 bonus on your next 
saving throw. If this benefi  t is not used immediately, it 
lasts until the start of your next turn.
DIVINE JUSTICE
You  can  channel  divine  energy  to  turn  
your foe’s strength against him, striking 
him with the same force that he used 
against you.
Prerequisite: Ability to turn or 
rebuke undead.
Benefi  t: As a swift action, 
you can expend a turn or re-
bu ke undead at tempt to mark 
an opponent as the target of 
this feat. The next time this op-
ponent str i kes you w ith an ar med 
melee  attack  or  a  natural  weapon,  
record  the  damage  he  deals.  The  
next time you strike him in melee, 
you deal that damage or your weap-
on’s  normal  damage,  whichever  
is greater. Your weapon’s qual i-
ties still determine if damage 
reduction applies to the dam-
age you deal.
        You  can  mark  only  one  
opponent at a ti me w ith this feat. 
You must take damage from 
your foe within 1 minute 
of using this feat, or your 
turn  or  rebuke  undead  
attempt is wasted. After 
taking damage, you must 
strike  your  foe  within  1  
minute, or you lose this feat’s 
benefi t. Until you strike your 
foe  and  trigger  the  feat’s  benefi  t,  
you cannot use this feat again to mark 
the same or a different opponent.
DIVINE WARD
You create a channel of divine energy between yourself and 
a willing ally. This link allows you to cast your spells upon 
him from greater than normal range.
Prerequisite: Ability to turn or rebuke undead.
 Benefi  t: Once every 24 hours, you can spend 10 minutes 
creating a magical ward between you and one willing target. 
Regdar practices his combat forms
Illus. by D. Hudnut
620_95374_Ch3.indd   88620_95374_Ch3.indd   882/8/06   3:52:21 PM2/8/06   3:52:21 PM

89
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
For the rest of the 24-hour period, you can increase the range 
of a touch spell to short range (25 feet + 5 feet per two caster 
levels) if you target the warded creature, and only the warded 
creature. When you cast a spell in this manner, you must 
expend a turn or rebuke undead attempt.
    You can create a ward between you and more than one 
target, so long as you ex pend the necessar y time and t ur ning 
attempts. You must expend a turn or rebuke undead attempt 
to create each ward beyond the fi  rst.
PROFANE AUR A
You call upon the dark powers you worship to fi ll the area 
around you with a dreadful mist that obscures sight.
 Prerequisites: Divine caster level 9th, ability to rebuke 
undead.
 Benefi  t: As a standard action, you can expend one of your 
rebuke  undead  attempts  to  fi ll the area around you with a 
cold, clammy mist. The mist extends out in a 60-foot-radius 
emanation centered on you and fl  ows through the air as you 
move, keeping you at the center of its area. The mist provides 
concealment to creatures within the cloud. While in the 
mist, creatures (including you) 5 feet away from each other 
have concealment, and creatures separated by more than 5 
feet have total concealment from each other.
    In addition, mindless undead creatures within the cloud 
gain a +2 defl  ection bonus to AC.
SACRED HEALING
You can channel divine energy to aid in your efforts to tend 
to a comrade’s injuries, sickness, or other conditions.
 Prerequisite: Ability to turn undead.
 Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can expend a turn undead 
attempt to augment your ability to tend to the wounds of 
others. You gain a +5 bonus on Heal checks and a +2 bonus 
per die on the damage healed by any conjuration (healing) 
spells  you  cast.  This  benefit  lasts  until  the  end  of  your  
current turn.
SACRED PURIFICATION
You serve as a conduit of divine energy, fi  lling the area around 
you with power that aids the living and saps the undead.
 Prerequisites: Sacred Healing, ability to turn undead.
 Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can expend a turn undead 
attempt  to  create  a  pulse  of  divine  energy.  All  living  
creatures within 60 feet of you heal an amount of damage 
equal to 1d8 points + your Charisma bonus (if any). All undead 
creatures in this area take damage equal to 1d8 points + your 
Charisma bonus.
SACRED R ADIANCE
You channel divine energy to fi ll the area around you with 
a soothing, gentle radiance.
 Prerequisites: Divine caster level 9th, ability to turn 
undead.
 Benefit: As a standard action, you can expend a turn 
undead at tempt to bathe yoursel f in l ight. This l ight prov ides 
bright illumination in a 60-foot-radius emanation centered 
on  you  and  an  additional  60  feet  of  shadowy  illumination  
beyond that area. The light moves as you move, keeping you 
at the center of its area. It temporarily negates areas of magical 
darkness created by spells of 3rd level or lower.
    Any non-evil creature within 60 feet of you gains a +2 
morale bonus on saves against fear, poison, disease, and death 
effects. Evil creatures take a –2 penalty on saves against 
fear effects.
    This    benefi  t lasts for 10 minutes.
HERITAGE FEATS
A heritage feat signifi  es a specifi  c ancestry of your character. 
The heritage feats in this book allow your sorcerer to tap 
into the celestial or infernal source of his magical power to 
master new abilities (a sorcerer’s draconic heritage source of 
power is covered in Complete Arcane). You and your DM are 
encouraged to come up with a background stor y explaining 
your character’s heritage, though the exact source of this 
ancestral link isn’t crucial to the feat’s operation (and might 
remain a mystery to the character).
    A character can select a heritage feat at any level. Choos-
ing a heritage feat after 1st level signifi es that the ancestral 
power of the character is only now manifesting itself. (A 
character’s  first  choice  among  these  heritage  feats  must  
be either Celestial Sorcerer Heritage or Infernal Sorcerer 
Heritage, because all other heritage feats have one of these 
feats as a prerequisite.)
     While different sorts of heritage feats cannot normally be 
combined (see page 37 of the Planar Handbook supplement), a 
single sorcerer could possess draconic, infernal, and celestial 
Table 3–4: Divine Feats
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
Divine Armor Divine caster level 5th,  Expend turn/rebuke attempt to gain DR 5/– 
 ability to turn or rebuke undead
Divine Fortune Divine caster level 5th,  Expend turn/rebuke attempt for +4 bonus on next save
 ability to turn or rebuke undead
Divine Justice Ability to turn or rebuke undead Expend turn/rebuke attempt, choose foe, 
  deal your damage or his
Divine Ward Ability to turn or rebuke undead Increase range of spells from touch to short for ally
Profane Aura Divine caster level 9th,  Create mist that grants concealment, 
 ability to rebuke undead +2 AC for undead
Sacred Healing Ability to turn undead Expend turn attempt for bonus on healing attempts
   Sacred Purification Sacred Healing, ability to turn undead Expend turn attempt to heal living and harm undead
Sacred Radiance Divine caster level 9th,  Expend turn attempt to create radius of light that 
 ability to turn undead soothes allies, hampers undead
620_95374_Ch3.indd   89620_95374_Ch3.indd   892/8/06   3:52:31 PM2/8/06   3:52:31 PM

90
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
sorcerer heritage feats. In this case, the sorcerer claims a 
truly varied family tree that includes a variety of strange 
beings. Sorcerers with both infernal and celestial traits are 
exceedingly rare, however. These casters are tormented 
souls, pulled between the polar opposites that lurk within 
their blood.
     The  nine  feats  described  below  are  heritage  feats.  Their  
prerequisites and benefi  ts are summarized on Table 3–5.
CELESTIAL SORCERER AUR A
The power of your sorcerous heritage shines through, allowing 
you to infuse the area around you with a menacing aura.
Prerequisites:  Celestial  Sorcerer  Heritage,  sorcerer  
level 1st.
Benefit: As a standard action, you can expend a spell 
slot  to  generate  a  righteous  aura  of  menace  that  affects  
all hostile creatures in a 20-foot radius around you. All 
your opponents within this area must make a Will save 
(DC 10 + the level of the spell slot expended + your Cha 
modifier). On a failed save, a creature takes a –2 penalty 
on attack rolls, checks, and saves for 24 hours or until it 
successful ly hits you. A creat ure that resists or brea ks this 
effect cannot be affected by it again for 24 hours. This is a 
supernatural ability.
CELESTIAL SORCERER HERITAGE
Your ancestry manifests in the form of several special abilities. 
You gain access to abilities similar to those of an archon.
Prerequisite: Sorcerer level 1st.
 Benefit: You gain a bonus on saves against electricity 
and petrification equal to the number of celestial sorcerer 
feats you possess. You also add protection from evil to your 
list of 1st-level sorcerer spells known. This spell is in 
addition to the spells you gain normally based on your 
sorcerer level.
CELESTIAL SORCERER LANCE
You can channel your arcane energy into a bolt of power that 
is baneful to evil creatures.
 Prerequisites:  Celestial  Sorcerer  Heritage,  sorcerer  
level 1st.
 Benefi  t: As a standard action, you can expend a spell slot 
to create a 60-foot line of energy that deals damage only 
against creatures with an evil alignment. The bolt deals 1d8 
points of damage per level of the spell slot spent to activate 
this ability. A Refl  ex save (DC 10 + the level of the spell slot 
expended + your Cha modifi  er) halves this damage. This is a 
supernatural ability.
CELESTIAL SORCERER LORE
The power of your ancestry grants you access to a variety of 
new spells.
Prerequisites: Celestial Sorcerer Heritage, any two other 
celestial sorcerer heritage feats, sorcerer level 1st.
Benefi  t: You add magic circle against evil, tongues, and teleport
to your list of spells known. You gain these spells when you 
gain access to spel ls of the appropr iate level. These spel ls are 
Table 3–5: Heritage Feats
Feat                                             Prerequisites                                             Benefi t
Celestial Sorcerer Heritage Sorcerer level 1st Gain bonus spell and a bonus on saves against 
  electricity and petrification
   Celestial Sorcerer Aura Celestial Sorcerer Heritage, sorcerer level 1st     Expend spell slot to create righteous aura
   Celestial Sorcerer Lance Celestial Sorcerer Heritage, sorcerer level 1st     Expend spell slot to create energy bolt that 
  harms evil creatures
   Celestial Sorcerer Wings Celestial Sorcerer Heritage, sorcerer level 1st     Expend spell slot to fl y for short period of time
   Celestial Sorcerer Lore Celestial Sorcerer Heritage,  Add magic circle against evil, tongues, teleport
 any two other celestial sorcerer heritage feats,     to list of spells known
 sorcerer level 1st
Infernal Sorcerer Heritage Sorcerer level 1st Gain bonus against fire and poison, 
  +2 caster level with conjuration (summoning)
   Infernal Sorcerer Eyes Infernal Sorcerer Heritage, sorcerer level 1st Expend spell slot to see in darkness
   Infernal Sorcerer Howl Infernal Sorcerer Heritage, sorcerer level 1st Expend spell slot to create cone of sonic energy
   Infernal Sorcerer Resistance   Infernal Sorcerer Heritage, sorcerer level 1st Gain acid and cold resistance
A tiefl 
ing sorcerer rends the air with her Infernal Sorcerer Howl
Illus. by L.Parillo
620_95374_Ch3.indd   90620_95374_Ch3.indd   902/8/06   3:52:37 PM2/8/06   3:52:37 PM

91
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
in addition to the spells you gain normally based on your 
sorcerer level.
CELESTIAL SORCERER WINGS
You channel your inborn magical abilities to spawn a pair of 
spectral, magical wings that glow with majestic power.
 Prerequisites:  Celestial  Sorcerer  Heritage,  sorcerer  
level 1st.
 Benefi  t: You can expend a spell slot as a standard action to 
gain the ability to fl  y.  You  fl y at a speed equal to twice your 
base land speed w ith good maneuverabi l it y. This benefi  t  lasts  
for 1 round per level of the spell slot used to activate it. This 
is a supernatural ability.
INFERNAL SORCERER EYES
Your eyes glow w ith in fer nal fi  re, allowing you to see through 
magical darkness.
 Prerequisites:  Infernal  Sorcerer  Heritage,  sorcerer  
level 1st.
 Benefi  t: As a swift action, you can expend a spell slot to 
cause your eyes to emit a spectral red glow. You gain the ability 
to see perfectly in darkness of any kind, out to the limit of 
your line of sight. You ignore the concealment provided by 
darkness spells and effects. This benefi  t lasts for 10 minutes 
per level of the spell slot used to activate it.
INFERNAL SORCERER HERITAGE
Your innate magic derives from infernal ancestors. Your 
blood  is  thick  with  their  power,  allowing  you  to  exhibit  a  
variety of abilities.
 Prerequisite: Sorcerer level 1st.
 Benefi  t: You gain a bonus on saves against fi  re and poison 
equal to the number of infernal sorcerer heritage feats you 
possess. When you use a conjuration (summoning) spell 
to summon an evil outsider, you gain a +2 bonus to your 
caster level.
INFERNAL SORCERER HOWL
You channel the fury of your infernal ancestors into a thun-
derous roar that blasts your enemies with sonic power.
 Prerequisites:  Infernal  Sorcerer  Heritage,  sorcerer  
level 1st.
 Benefi  t: By expending one of your spell slots, you create a 
30-foot cone of sonic energy. All opponents within the cone 
take 2d6 points of damage per level of the spell slot expended. 
Each target can attempt a Fortitude save (DC 10 + the level of 
the spell slot expended + your Cha modifi  er) for half damage. 
This is a supernatural ability.
INFERNAL SORCERER RESISTANCE
You are as tough and resilient as an infernal monstrosity, 
allowing you to shrug off acid and cold damage.
 Prerequisites:  Infernal  Sorcerer  Heritage,  sorcerer  
level 1st.
 Benefi  t: You gain resistance to acid and resistance to cold 
equal to the total number of infernal sorcerer heritage feats 
you have.
METAMAGIC FEATS
Metamagic feats allow spellcasters to modify the way a spell 
is cast or the effect a spell has after it is successfully cast. Full 
information about metamagic feats appears on page 88 of the 
Player’s Handbook.
     The     fi  ve feats described below are new metamagic feats. Their 
prerequisites and benefi  ts are summarized on Table 3–6.
BLISTERING SPELL
You r  fi re spells sear the fl  esh  from  your  enemies’  bones,  
leaving them wracked with pain.
    Benefit: This metamagic feat can be applied only to a 
spell that has the fire descriptor. A blistering spell deals 
an extra 2 points of fire damage per level of the spell. In 
addition to the spell’s normal effect, any creature that fails 
its save against a blistering spell takes a –2 penalty on attack 
rolls and checks until the beginning of your next turn. A 
blistering spell uses up a spell slot one level higher than the 
spell’s actual level.
EARTHBOUND SPELL
You bind a spell into the rock and soil, leaving it there until 
an opponent stumbles across it. At that time, the spell releases 
its energy.
    Benefi  t: When you cast an earthbound spell, you place it 
within a square adjacent to you. You must specify all effects, 
options, and other relevant variables when you cast the spell. 
The  next  creature  to  enter  the  warded  square  triggers  the  
spell. If the spell affects an area, that square is the center of 
the area or the point at which the area begins. For a cone, 
line, or similar area, you must designate the direction in 
which the cone or line extends. An earthbound spell that 
does not affect an area targets the creature that triggered it. 
You cannot apply the Earthbound Spell metamagic feat to a 
spell with a range of personal.
    An earthbound spell remains in place for 1 hour or until 
it is triggered. A Search check (DC 25 + the spell’s level) 
reveals its presence, as does detect magic and similar abilities. A 
character with trapfi  nding can make a Disable Device check 
(DC 25 + the spell’s level) to remove an earthbound spell (as 
if it is a magic trap). A dispel magic effect can also remove an 
earthbound spell, thus preventing it from functioning.
     An earthbound spell uses up a spell slot two levels higher 
than the spell’s actual level.
FLASH FROST SPELL
Your spells that use cold and ice to damage your foes leave 
behind a thin layer of slippery frost.
    Benefi  t: This metamagic feat can be appl ied only to spel ls 
that have the cold descriptor and that affect an area. A fl  ash  
frost spell deals an extra 2 points of cold damage per level of 
the spell to all targets in the area. When you cast such a spell, 
the area of the spell is covered with a slippery layer of ice for 
1 round. Anyone attempting to move through this icy area 
must make a DC 10 Balance check or fall prone. A creature 
that  runs  or  charges  through  the  area  must  make  a  DC  20  
Balance check to avoid falling. A fl ash frost spell uses up a 
spell slot one level higher than the spell’s actual level.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   91620_95374_Ch3.indd   912/8/06   3:52:46 PM2/8/06   3:52:46 PM

92
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
IMBUED SUMMONING
Your summoning spells gain an element of surprise. You can 
summon creatures that come into existence with the benefi  t  
of a spell such as invisibility or bull’s strength.
 Prerequisites: Augment  Summoning,  Spell  Focus  
(conjuration).
 Benefi  t:  When  you  cast  a  spell  from  the  summoning  
subschool, you can choose to grant the summoned creature 
the benefi  t of any spell of 3rd level or lower you can cast that 
has a range of touch. You cast the spell you wish to grant the 
creature (using a prepared spell or a spell slot) at the same 
time you cast your summoning spell. The creature gains the 
benefi  t of the spell when it appears.
     An imbued summoning spell uses up a spell slot one level 
higher than the spell’s actual level.
SMITING SPELL
You can channel the energy of a touch spell into a weapon, 
causing the spell to discharge when you strike an opponent.
 Prerequisites: Base attack bonus +1, caster level 1st.
 Benefit: You can alter a spell with a range of touch to 
transfer its energy from your hand to a weapon that you 
hold.  The  next  time  you  strike  an  opponent  with  that  
weapon, the spell discharges. The target takes the normal 
damage and effects of a successful attack in addition to 
the spell’s effect. Once you place a spell into a weapon, 
you must discharge it within 1 minute, or its energy dis-
sipates harmlessly.
     You can place a smiting spell on a piece of ammunition or a 
projectile, such as a sling bullet, an arrow, or a crossbow bolt. 
In such a case, the spell dissipates if the attack misses. The 
spell cannot be placed on a bow, crossbow, sling, or similar 
weapon that uses ammunition.
    A smiting spell uses up a spell slot one level higher than 
the spell’s actual level.
TAC T IC A L   F E AT S
Tactical feats allow characters to perform a number of power-
ful maneuvers.
     If you are playing a character who has one or more tactical 
feats, you are responsible for keeping track of the actions 
needed to set up the feat’s maneuver. It’s also a good idea 
to briefl  y mention to the DM that you’re working toward a 
tactical maneuver—a remark along the lines of “I’m using 
my spi ked rebu ke maneuver this round. I’l l let you know i f I 
gain my attack bonus against any opponents who attack and 
miss me” is appropriate.
     Some descriptions of tactical feats refer to the fi  rst  round,  
second round, and so on. These terms are related to the timing 
of the maneuver, not the encounter as a whole. For instance, 
if you have the Combat Cloak Expert feat, you don’t have to 
move adjacent to an opponent in the fi rst round of combat 
to utilize the cloaked strike maneuver during that combat. 
Any round when you move adjacent to an opponent for the 
purpose  of  utilizing  this  maneuver  is  considered  the  fi  rst  
round of the maneuver.
    The six feats described below are tactical feats. Their pre-
requisites and benefi  ts are summarized on Table 3–7.
BLOOD-SPIKED CHARGER
You  throw  yourself  into  the  fray,  using  your  spiked  armor  
and spiked shield to tear your opponents to pieces.
 Prerequisites: Str 13, profi  ciency with spiked armor and 
spiked shields, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (spiked armor), 
Weapon Focus (spiked shield), base attack bonus +6.
 Benefi  t: The Blood-Spiked Charger feat grants you access 
to three special tactical maneuvers.
 Spiked Avalanche: When you are using the charge action 
while wearing spiked armor and carrying either a spiked 
shield or nothing in your hands, you throw yourself into the 
air,  transforming  yourself  into  a  deadly,  spiked  projectile.  
A successful attack with either your spiked shield or your 
Table 3–6: Metamagic Feats
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
Blistering Spell — Fire spells cause –2 penalty for 1 turn on failed save
Earthbound Spell — Cast spell into ground as a trap
Flash Frost Spell — Cold spells coat area of effect with slippery ice
Imbued Summoning Augment Summoning,  Summoned creature arrives with beneficial spell
 Spell Focus (conjuration)
Smiting Spell Base attack bonus +1, caster level 1st Place touch spell in weapon
Table 3 –7: Tac tic al Fe at s
Feat                                      Prerequisites                                      Benefi t
Blood-Spiked Charger Str 13, proficiency with armor spikes  Gain armor and shield spike maneuvers
 and shield spikes, Power Attack, 
 Weapon Focus (armor spikes), 
 Weapon Focus (shield spikes), 
 base attack bonus +6
Combat Cloak Expert Dex 15, Int 13, Combat Expertise,  Gain cloak maneuvers
 Dodge, base attack bonus +6
Combat Panache Bluff 8 ranks, Intimidate 8 ranks,  Gain charismatic combat maneuvers
 Perform 8 ranks
Einhander Tumble 6 ranks, base attack bonus +6 Gain one-handed weapon combat maneuvers
Mad Alchemist Grenadier, Craft (alchemy) 6 ranks Gain thrown item combat maneuvers
Shadow Striker Hide 12 ranks, Move Silently 12 ranks Gain stealthy combat maneuvers
620_95374_Ch3.indd   92620_95374_Ch3.indd   922/8/06   3:52:52 PM2/8/06   3:52:52 PM

93
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
spiked armor deals extra damage equal to twice your Strength 
bonus. You can attack with both your spiked armor and a 
spiked shield on this charge, each one benefi ting from the 
Strength bonus, but you take the normal penalties for using 
two weapons.
 Spiked Rebuke: When you are fighting defensively and 
carrying a spiked shield, you lash out at your foes with your 
shield in response to their attacks. Deter mine what your AC 
would be without your spiked shield and the AC bonus for 
fi  ghting defensively. If an opponent’s attack hits against this 
lower AC but misses against your actual AC, the foe strikes 
your shield, allowing you to defl  ect his attack in such a way as 
to leave him vulnerable to your counter. On your next action, 
you gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls against your chosen foe 
with your spiked shield.
 Spiked Slam: As a full-round action when you are wielding 
a spiked shield, you can opt to make only a single attack at 
your best base attack bonus. You brace yoursel f behind your 
spiked shield, drive yourself forward, and slam into your 
foe. You enter your foe’s space, which provokes attacks of 
opportunity. In return, your attack deals extra damage equal 
to twice your Strength and an additional amount based on 
your size (see below). After making this attack, you stumble 
back into the square you occupied just before making this 
attack. Until the start of your next turn, you do not threaten 
any squares.
Size                    Additional                    Damage
Small                              1d4
Medium                         1d6
Large                              1d8
Huge                              2d6
Gargantuan                    2d8
Colossal                         3d6
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Blood-Spiked Charger as one 
of his fi  ghter  bonus  feats.
COMBAT CLOAK EXPERT
You are adept at turning your cloak into a vital part of your 
combat reper toire. By t w irl ing it about you, sweeping it over 
enemies, and using it to conceal your weapon, you can catch 
an opponent by surprise.
 Prerequisites: Dex 15, Int 13, Combat Expertise, Dodge, 
base attack bonus +6.
 Benefi  t: The Combat Cloak Expert feat grants you access 
to three special tactical maneuvers. You must wear a cloak 
in order to utilize them.
 Cloak Defense: While you are fi  ghting defensively, you can 
use your cloak to confuse your foes. You hold it before your 
chest like a curtain, making it diffi cult for enemies to read 
your defensive moves. Your cloak grants you a +1 shield bonus 
to AC. If you use the total defense action, your cloak’s shield 
bonus improves to +2. (Shield bonuses do not stack, making 
it likely that this maneuver is a poor option if you already 
carry a shield.)
 Cloaked Strike: You can use your cloak to hide a light 
weapon. To utilize this maneuver, on the first round you 
must move adjacent to an opponent while you do not have 
a  weapon  in  either  hand.  On  the  second  round,  you  make  
a Bluff check opposed by your foe’s Sense Motive check as 
you  use  a  move  action  to  draw  your  weapon.  If  this  check  
succeeds, your opponent loses either his Dexterity bonus to 
AC or his shield bonus to AC (your choice) until the end of 
your current turn.
 Whirling  Cloak:  You  can  attempt  to  use  your  cloak  to  
confuse your opponent. As a move action after successfully 
striking an opponent in melee, make a melee touch attack 
against that foe. If this attack hits, you whirl your cloak 
around him, temporarily ruining his defenses. Your opponent 
cannot make attacks of opportunity against a particular ally 
of your choice until the start of his next turn.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Combat Cloak Expert as one 
of his fi  ghter  bonus  feats.
COMBAT PANACHE
Your  glowing  personality  and  sharp  performance  abilities  
allow you to navigate the battlefi  eld on sheer chutzpah alone. 
While others rely on swords and armor, you use your cutting 
wit and ability to manipulate others.
 Prerequisites: Bluff 8 ranks, Intimidate 8 ranks, Perform 
8 ranks.
 Benefi  t:  The  Combat  Panache  feat  grants  you  access  to  
three special tactical maneuvers.
 Fortuitous Tumble: For a brief moment, you appear to let your 
guard down. As your foe swings at you, you slip out of the way, 
causing his attack to slam into one of his allies. By positioning 
yourself correctly and making yourself an appealing target, 
you dupe your foe into making a critical blunder.
    To use this maneuver, you must be successfully attacked 
by a foe. On your next turn, you can take a move action to 
make a Bluff check opposed by his Sense Motive check. If 
you succeed on the check, you can take an immediate action 
at the start of your foe’s next turn and designate a different 
target for your opponent’s nex t melee attack (which must be 
a creature it threatens).
 Play  Dead:  You  crumple  to  the  ground  as  if  slain,  luring  
your opponent into a false sense of security. As an immediate 
action after you are hit for at least 10 points of damage by a 
single attack, you can attempt to play dead. You drop prone 
and make a Bluff check opposed by your attacker’s (or any 
other  relevant  observer’s)  Sense  Motive  check.  If  you  suc-
ceed  on  this  check,  the  observer  assumes  you  are  dead.  If  
you subsequently rise and attack him in the same round, he 
loses any attack of opportunity he might have been entitled 
to against you, and he loses his Dexterity bonus to AC against 
the fi  rst attack that you make.
    You can use this ability once per encounter. Standing up 
after playing dead does not provoke attacks of opportunity.
 Sneering Glower: With just the right mix of your intimidat-
ing presence and your martial talents, you strike such fear 
into your target that he has di f fi  culty  fi  ghting you effectively. 
On your next turn after you deal at least 1 point of damage 
to your opponent, you can make an Intimidate check against 
him as a move action. If you succeed on this check, your foe 
takes a penalty on his attack rolls against you equal to your 
Charisma bonus. You can gain this benefi  t against only one 
620_95374_Ch3.indd   93620_95374_Ch3.indd   932/8/06   3:52:58 PM2/8/06   3:52:58 PM

94
CHAPTER 3
NEW FEATS
foe  at  a  time;  it  lasts  for  the  duration  of  the  encounter  or  
until  you  switch  targets.  If  you  designate  a  new  target  for  
this ability (by attempting a new Intimidate check against 
a different creature), the previous target no longer takes the 
penalty on his attack rolls against you. Opponents that are 
immune to the effects of the Intimidate skill, such as mind-
less creatures and those with immunity to fear, are immune 
to this maneuver.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Combat Panache as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
EINHANDER
You excel at wielding a one-handed weapon while carrying 
nothing in your off hand.
 Prerequisites: Tumble 6 ranks, base attack bonus +6.
 Benefit: If you are fighting with a one-handed weapon 
or a light weapon and carrying nothing in your off hand, 
the Einhander feat grants you access to three special tacti-
cal maneuvers.
     Narrow     Profi     le: You can tuck your arm behind your back 
and  offer  a  narrow  profile  when  you  concentrate  on  
defense rather than of fense. You gain an additional +2 dodge 
bonus to AC when fi ghting defensively or using the total 
defense action.
     Off-Hand     Balance: You use your off hand to balance yourself 
while  performing  acrobatic  maneuvers.  After  you  success-
fully strike an opponent, you gain a +2 bonus on Tumble 
checks to avoid his attacks of opportunity until the start of 
your  next  turn.  When  you  fl  ip  and  roll  out  of  harm’s  way,  
you use one hand to keep your balance and your other hand 
to keep your weapon trained on your foe.
    Off-Hand    Swap: With a fl  ourish,  you  fl  ip your weapon into 
the air, catch it in your off hand, and continue to press the 
attack. When you use this maneuver, you must fi  rst take a 
full attack action to strike an opponent at least twice. On 
your next turn, you can make a special feint as a free action, 
using Sleight of Hand rather than Blu f f. Your opponent uses 
the standard rules for resisting a feint. Once you use this 
maneuver against a particular opponent, whether it succeeds 
or fails, you cannot use it against him again.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Einhander as one of his fi  ghter  
bonus feats.
MAD ALCHEMIST
You  are  an  expert  at  using  alchemical  items.  Through  
experimentation, research, and your careful study of the art 
of alchemy, you have learned to make the most of items such 
as alchemist’s fi  re.
 Prerequisites: Craft (alchemy) 6 ranks, Grenadier.
 Benefi  t: The Mad Alchemist feat grants you access to three 
special tactical maneuvers.
 Distracting Blast: If you ready an action to throw a thunder-
stone at the square an opponent occupies, you can disrupt his 
actions. The sudden bang from the stone’s detonation ruins 
your foe’s concentration, possibly spoiling his attack or his 
attempt to cast a spell. If the target of this blast was casting 
a spell when you threw the thunderstone, he must make a 
Concentration check opposed by your Craft (alchemy) check. 
If you succeed on this check, his spell is ruined. If the target 
was not casting a spell, he must make a Will save opposed by 
your Craft (alchemy) check or take a –2 penalty on attack rolls, 
checks, and saves until the beginning of your next turn.
    Fiery    Blaze: To use this maneuver, you must fi rst strike a 
creature  with  a  container  of  lantern  oil  or  alchemist’s  fi  re.  
On your next turn, you must strike the creature with a spell 
or weapon attack that deals fi re damage. If you do so, the 
creature takes an extra 1d6 points of fi  re damage and catches 
on fi  re if it is not already in fl  ames.
 Tanglefoot Defense: By tearing open a tanglefoot bag and 
spreading its contents across an area, you can create a vexing 
barrier that hinders an opponent’s approach. As a standard 
action, you can transform a single square of clear terrain into 
diffi cult terrain through the use of a tanglefoot bag. This 
effect persists for 10 minutes before the tanglefoot bag loses 
its potency.
SHADOW STRIKER
You melt into the shadows, hiding from your enemies until 
the time is right. Your cunning, guile, and stealth allow you 
to pick the most opportune moment to strike.
 Prerequisites: Hide 12 ranks, Move Silently 12 ranks.
 Benefi  t: The Shadow Striker feat grants you access to three 
special tactical maneuvers.
 Evade Notice: If both you and an al ly threaten an opponent, 
you can attempt to slip beneath your opponent’s notice. On 
your turn, if you take no hostile actions, such as attacking, 
casting an offensive spell, and so forth, you can make a Hide 
check opposed by the threatened foe’s Spot check. If you 
succeed on this check, your foe cannot attack you on his next 
turn as long as he threatens another active opponent. If you 
attack your foe for any reason before or during his next turn, 
you lose this maneuver’s benefi t.
 Fade Away: To use this maneuver, you must fi  rst  attack  an  
opponent as a standard action, then move away and attempt 
a Hide check as part of your move action for the turn. If your 
attack hits, it creates a momentary diversion, granting you a 
+5 bonus on this Hide check.
 Ghost Strike: You use an ally’s distraction and your talent to 
move noiselessly and sl ip out of your opponent ’s fi  eld of vision 
for a single, crucial moment. To use this maneuver, both you 
and an ally must threaten a single foe. As a standard action, 
you make a Move Silently check opposed by your foe’s Listen 
check. If you succeed on this check, you gain this maneuver ’s 
benefi t. On the next round, your target loses his Dexterity 
bonus to AC against your fi  rst attack of the round so long as 
your ally still threatens him.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Shadow Striker as one of his 
fi  ghter bonus feats.
620_95374_Ch3.indd   94620_95374_Ch3.indd   942/8/06   3:53:05 PM2/8/06   3:53:05 PM

his chapter presents new tools and weapons for 
spellcasters of all types. The spells range in power 
and utility, from a handful of direct- and indirect-
damage spel ls to spel ls that move the caster and his 
allies or enemies across the battlefi  eld  and  those  
that allow the caster to act on borrowed time. 
Some spells call or summon new allies for the spellcaster. 
Channeled spells are a new type of spell that have a greater 
effect the longer you spend casting. Other spells, such as 
the various crown spells, have an ongoing effect that can be 
discharged for a more powerful result.
     The chapter begins with the spell lists for the spellcasting 
classes, including the new classes in Chapter 1 of this book. 
An M or F appearing at the end of a spell’s name denotes a 
spell with a material or focus component, respectively, that 
is not normally included in a spell component pouch. An X 
denotes a spell with an XP component paid by the caster.
     After the spell lists, the new spells appear in alphabetical 
order by spell name (with the exception of those whose 
names begin with “greater,” “mass,” or “swift”; see Order of 
Presentation, PH 181). For explanation of spell terminology, 
see Chapter 10 of the Player’s Handbook.
DUAL-SCHOOL SPELLS
Dual-school spells, featured in this book for the fi  rst  time,  
have effects that encompass two distinct schools of magic. In 
all cases, treat these spells as if they belonged to both schools 
simultaneously. Effects that prevent a spellcaster from 
accessing one school of a dual-school spell prevent all access 
to that spel l. For example, a special ist w izard cannot lear n 
a dual-school spell if either of the spell’s schools is one of 
his prohibited schools. Benefi ts that apply to a school of 
magic do not stack with themselves even if the spellcaster 
can apply them to both schools of magic. For example, 
if a spellcaster has the Spell Focus feat for either school, 
it applies to the dual-school spell normally. However, 
spellcasters who have taken the Spell Focus feat for both 
of a dual-school spell’s associated schools only increase 
the DC of the dual-school spell by +1.
THE POLYMORPH SUBSCHOOL
Another feature new in Player’s Handbook II is the poly-
morph subschool, defi  ned and explained below.
     A  spell  of  the  polymorph  subschool  changes  the  
target ’s for m from one shape to another. Unless stated 
otherwise in the spell’s description, the target of a 
polymorph spell takes on all the statistics and special 
abilities of an average member of the new form in 
place of its own except as follows: 
•   The target retains its own alignment (and personal-
ity, within the limits of the new form’s ability scores).
•   The target retains its own hit points. 
•   The target is treated has having its normal Hit Dice 
for purpose of adjudicating effects based on HD, 
95
Illus. by R. HorsleyIllus. by R. Horsley
620_95374_Ch4.indd   95620_95374_Ch4.indd   952/8/06   4:01:18 PM2/8/06   4:01:18 PM

96