CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
Each time he gave you a task that seemed meaningless to the 
actual job at hand, more often than not it proved necessary 
to  achieving  his  goal.  As  you  completed  these  tasks,  you  
would quietly watch your master, learning all you could from 
observation before he gave your next task.
 Transition: What drove you from the comforting grip of 
the  workshop  to  the  world  of  adventure?  Your  motivation  
could come from within, or events beyond your control might 
have cast you into the role of an adventurer.
     Perhaps the toil of the workshop grew tiresome. You always 
preferred tales of heroes, monsters, and ancient treasures to 
your master ’s long lect ures on responsibi l it y, technique, and 
craftsmanship. As soon as you had enough money saved, you 
left your master and took up training in your current class. 
Your master might still hold a grudge for your desertion; if 
he  is  powerful  in  his  community  or  guild,  you  can  expect  
trouble from him in the future.
     If your master was cruel, life on the road could have been 
a better option than another year of slaving away in his shop. 
Underfed,  beaten  for  the  smallest  infraction,  and  worked  
to the point of exhaustion, you didn’t so much leave your 
craft as escape from it. Alone in the world and penniless, 
you  learned  enough  to  survive  and  eventually  became  an  
adventurer. Perhaps a kindly new master took you in, or you 
were drafted into military or religious service.
     Artisans need peace and stability to make a living. A war, 
plague, or other calamity could have forced you onto the 
adventurer’s path. If orcs sacked your home cit y and burned 
it to the ground, you could have become an adventurer out of 
necessity rather than any desire for glory. Perhaps you thirst 
for vengeance against the cruel tyrant who slew your master 
and smashed your dreams of becoming a respected artisan 
with a shop of your own.
 At the Table: Comment on the craftsmanship of weapons 
and armor you fi  nd. A dwarf craftsman might take the time 
to wonder at the beauti ful car v ings on an ancient, abandoned 
stronghold’s walls. An elf artisan might be arrogant toward 
human goods. While other members of the party are excited 
at the magical properties of a sword, you fi nd the excellent 
quality of its blade and the fi  ne detailed work in its pommel 
worthy of comment. To you, a dungeon can also be a museum 
of an ancient civilization’s artwork and craftsmanship.
ASCETIC
Sequestered in a convent, monastery, library, or school, you spent 
your  youth  in  study,  contemplation,  and  refl  ection.  Through  
meditation, academic study, or prayer, you honed your passion 
for knowledge in the fi  re of your will. Through discipline and 
perseverance, you still constantly drive yourself to unlock 
lore, whether it is hidden in ancient texts or religious scrip-
ture or revealed through constant meditative practice.
 Youth: As a child you spent hours retrieving and cataloging 
tomes and scrolls for older scholars who left you to your own 
devices once they had the materials they sought. Spending 
these hours with little supervision, you learned the location of 
nearly every work stored in the library of the mountain abbey 
you called home. While at that age you couldn’t fathom the 
mysteries stored within, you kept a mental tally of those that 
interested you most. From time to time you would be sent to 
the kitchen for food, or to wash dishes, or to run any number 
of errands. Each such excursion away from the library that 
you had come to call home felt like a test—of your resolve 
to learn, of your desire to spend time only in the library, or 
simply of your youthful patience.
 Transition: A scholar can only learn so much in a library 
surrounded by books. Your masters ordered you out into the 
world to experience its wonders fi  rsthand.  Having  learned  
everything  your  masters  can  teach,  you  can  never  return  
home until your magic or ki is strong enough, or until you 
have sur passed your masters, or you have achieved enl ighten-
ment or ultimate arcane or divine power.
     Alternatively, a rivalry or power struggle among your masters 
might have forced you out into the world. Your tutor or sponsor 
fell into disgrace or disappeared under mysterious circum-
stances. Without your master around, there was no longer a 
place for you. You still seek him, or at least to avenge him.
    Perhaps rather than simply leaving your order, you were 
expelled. Scholarship demands innovation and forward thought, 
but your thoughts were too radical for your elders. Your ideas 
were deemed dangerous or subversive or heretical, forcing 
your exile. Maybe you delved into lore too dangerous for mere 
apprentices, such as spel ls to summon forgot ten gods or bind 
demons. Perhaps a rival student framed you.
     At the Table: You know a lot, and you aren’t afraid to show 
it  off.  While  others  might  refer  to  creatures  by  common  
names such as “kobold,” “troglodyte,” and “bugbear,” you 
know the proper classifi  cation of each in Old Draconic. If you 
fi  nd an ancient l ibrar y, a col lection of scrol ls, or even ancient 
murals  and  frescoes  that  depict  myths  and  prehistorical  
events, you happily lose yourself in studying them even in 
the midst of a dungeon.
    If you trained as a monk or cleric, the habits, beliefs, and 
ethos instilled in you by your upbringing play a major role in 
your life. For example, you might be a vegetarian if your sect 
forbids the eating of meat, and you aren’t afraid to tell others 
of the superiority of your diet. You have an old saying or a 
bit of wisdom for every occasion. When faced with a tough 
decision, you turn to a religious book or similar manual for 
guidance. You quote scripture or your master’s sayings to 
support your arguments and decisions.
DRIFTER
Home? What’s that? You spent your entire life on the road, 
moving from town to town. You get by taking odd jobs, some 
less savory than others, or performing for a night’s bed and 
food. People are your stock in trade; your keen understanding 
of their attitudes, behaviors, and desires keeps you employed 
and alive. When things go bad, it’s time for you and yours to 
move on to the nex t town. Sur v ival has always been your fi  rst  
priority, and you have become quite good at it.
 Youth: As a child, you spent the majority of your days either 
on the road or performing odd jobs and running errands for your 
elders. You put any talents you had to work for you just to get by 
and perhaps earn a little food or a few spare coins. You might have 
turned to crime when things became desperate, or you might 
have resisted all temptation no matter how bad things got.
620_95374_Ch5.indd   130620_95374_Ch5.indd   1302/8/06   4:07:03 PM2/8/06   4:07:03 PM

131
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
    You could have ended up on the road due to a number of 
reasons. You might have been separated from your family at a 
young age due to war or some other disaster. A plague could have 
left you a sole survivor and driven you from your hometown. 
Perhaps you grew up in an orphanage and ran away as soon as you 
were able. Your parents could have been wanderers themselves, 
so that you never knew any other life, at fi  rst being carried on 
your mother’s back and then later walking beside her.
 Transition: Moving from the life of a scrounging drifter 
to that of an adventurer was easy for you. The skills you 
learned on the roads or in the alleys and taprooms of the 
world prove useful to any adventurer. Perhaps you managed 
a heist that scored you enough money to buy you thieves’ 
tools, a weapon, and some ar mor. That single w ind fal l was 
enough to transform you from just another wanderer to a 
skilled, armed adventurer.
     You  might  have  stumbled  into  the  adventurer’s  life  by  
accident. Seeking shelter from a storm, you entered a cave 
that turned out to be a monster’s lair. You managed to slay 
the beast and afterward helped yourself to its treasure. Your 
fi  rst taste of adventure was frightening and exhilarating (and 
profi  table), and you developed a liking for the activity.
    Adventure    fi  nds you as often as you fi  nd it. Perhaps mon-
sters threaten the area you are traveling through, leaving you 
with a simple choice: fi  ght,  fl  ee, or die. Maybe you’ve always 
tried to help others as you were passing through an area. Now 
that you’re older, stronger, and more skilled, you can take a 
more active role in protecting the common fol k and helping 
out where you can.
 At the Table: You’ve done it all before, and your experience 
makes  you  calm  in  a  crisis.  When  a  sudden  thunderstorm  
rolls  in,  you  know  how  to  fi nd shelter. When it comes to 
surviving in the wilds or making your way through a city, you 
are a treasure trove of folktales, traveler’s lore, and common 
sense. Worldly for your age, you aren’t afraid to show off that 
knowledge in front of others. Sheltered people, those who 
grew up in far easier circumstances than you, earn your 
disdain if they can’t keep up with you. You didn’t grow up 
with much, but you learned to take care of yourself.
FA R M   H A ND
Born and raised on the farm, you developed a keen understand-
ing of agrar ian l i fe, as wel l as a strong work ethic. Accustomed 
to  being  up  at  dawn  and  asleep  by  dusk,  you  can  track  the  
seasons  by  touch  and  smell.  You  know  the  satisfaction  of  
cultivating the earth on which you live, and you relish the 
responsibi l it y of ta king care of the animals that you depend on 
for food, clothing, and companionship. Some might consider 
this a simple life, but those who have that attitude know very 
little  about  how  to  work  with  the  land  or  understand  the  
respect necessary to coax it to bear fruit.
 Youth: As a child, you hung upon the apron strings of those 
working  in  the  home  and  hearth.  You  learned  to  clean  the  
dwelling in which you lived, as well as cook for those who lived 
there with you. As you grew older, your daily chores became 
more complicated and laborious. From splitting and hauling 
fi  rewood, feeding and cleaning up after the animals, and working 
the earth to produce the crops you need to live on, you learned 
every aspect of farm life and grew to appreciate the hard work 
that was required just to put enough food on the table. In your 
free time you lear ned to fi  sh and hunt, supplementing your daily 
diet with game from the nearby wood or stream.
 Transition: Shifting from the humdrum life of a farmer to 
the exciting, deadly path of an advent urer was no easy change 
for you to make. You left behind generations of tradition to 
seek the adventuring life. Whether you were pushed into this 
decision or happily left your family’s fi elds behind you, you 
know that you can never go back to that life again.
     Life on the farm is never easy, and a cruel, demanding ruler 
only makes things worse. A distant war, a monarch obsessed 
with building monuments or enjoying the pleasures of the 
court, or a few years of insuffi  cient rain and harsh winters: All 
these factors can drive a farmer to seek a better life. Perhaps 
the peasants and yeomen rose up in rebellion. You were one 
of the lucky ones who managed to escape when the king’s 
men razed your village. You learned to handle a weapon in 
the uprising, and a slain mercenary raider’s weapons and 
armor became your fi  rst set of adventuring gear. Maybe one 
day you’l l ret ur n to avenge your fami ly and fr iends, but unti l 
then you hone your skills.
     A lter natively, you might have lef t the far m of your own free 
will. Maybe you weren’t in line to inherit any of your father’s 
land, leaving you with little choice but to seek another option. 
Too ambitious to stay on the farm, at the fi  rst  opportunity  
you headed for a life of adventure. Your family still lives in 
your old hometown, and maybe you visit from time to time 
or send them a few coins now and then to help out when the 
harvest is bad and times are tight.
 At the Table: You are accustomed to hard work and have 
little patience for those who are lazy, negligent, or irrespon-
sible. You have toiled for hours under a hot sun to feed your 
family, and you have no time for those who aren’t willing to 
put out a similar effort.
     When you and your companions enter a rural community, 
you’re the best choice to serve as your group’s spokesperson. 
You might not be the most elegant fi  gure in the party, but you 
know how to talk with ordinary people. Despite the armor 
you wear, the weapons you carry, or the magic you command, 
at heart you’re still one of them. Any threat to the common 
folk is likely to draw a sharp reaction from you.
GLADIATOR
Born a slave, you trained from an early age to fight with 
weapons or magic. Experts were brought in from all over 
the world to train you and your fellows in various forms of 
attack and defense, imparting to you a respect for cultures 
outside your own, as well as their methods of combat. Even 
as a young child, you were forced to fi  ght in the arena against 
other children as well as animals not considered a threat to 
older, more experienced gladiators. Given your innate sense 
of dramatic fl  air, you have come to enjoy the adulation of the 
crowd, as well as the respect of your peers.
 Youth: Your daily routine began with a strict regimen of 
calisthenics followed by training in the pits. Every hour you 
trained with a different master, each focusing on different 
methods of fi  ghting and teaching you ways to present yourself 
620_95374_Ch5.indd   131620_95374_Ch5.indd   1312/8/06   4:07:10 PM2/8/06   4:07:10 PM

132
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
with a distinct theatrical air. After a noon meal, you were set 
to  sparring  in  the  arena,  focusing  on  different  tactics  and  
scenarios—some  meant  for  the  individual  and  some  done  
in pairs, each gladiator working in tandem with another.
Transition: A gladiator revolt allowed you to break free of 
your masters. In a single night of carefully planned violence, 
you  turned  the  tables  on  your  captors  and  made  a  daring  
escape. You were one of the lucky ones who made it out alive, 
but your former masters placed a price on your head. You have 
run far away, but who knows when a cunning bounty hunter 
or a vengeful tracker might fi  nd you? Thus, you keep to the 
road. You prefer never to talk about your past, and you make 
an active effort to disguise your true identity. Anyone who 
shows an unusual interest in you could be a threat.
     Alternatively, perhaps you earned your freedom through your 
success in the arena. Even so, your past haunts you. Old r ivals 
from your fi  ghting days, relatives of opponents you killed, and 
cocky young brawlers seeking to make a name for themselves 
all seek you out with bloody intent. Your fame is an unwelcome 
burden, just as likely to cause trouble as earn favors.
     Once you entered the wide world, you had few skills aside 
from those you learned in the arena and under the tutelage 
of  the  pit  masters.  Mercenary  work  didn’t  appeal  to  you,  
since you’ve already had your fi  ll of demanding masters. As 
an adventurer, you can risk your life as you choose and for 
your own profi  t. Life is much better this way.
At the Table: You are an expert on weapons, armor, and fi  ght-
ing styles. When you size up others, you look at them in terms of 
their fi  ghting ability. You collect trophies from fallen enemies, 
both to respect the talent they dis-
played in standing against 
you  and  to  com-
memorate your 
v ictor ies. When you face a problem, v iolence is your prefer red 
solution (soft words and subtle methods never served you well in 
the arena). Politics are beyond you. There’s no obstacle that can’t 
be overcome with a swift blow to the head. When it comes time 
to make plans, you argue for a direct and violent solution.
    Your weapons, armor, and other tools of combat are your 
wards against defeat. You spend time each morning caring for 
your weapons and gear. A warrior who doesn’t take care of his 
gear risks losing his next fi  ght, and you always plan to win.
GUTTERSNIPE
Born into poverty, you grew up on the streets. When other 
chi ldren went home to their parents, you slept in back al leys 
and  dilapidated  abandoned  buildings,  getting  food  where  
you  could  and  making  friends  and  family  out  of  those  in  
similar straits. Those with roofs over their heads and doors to 
close against the night looked down upon you, calling you a 
wor thless, no -good street urchin. They didn’t understand the 
kind of skills you possessed, skills that allowed you to fi  nd  
what you needed to survive, whether that was food, drinkable 
water, or a safe place to sleep.
Youth: Living on the streets was tough—dodging bullies 
and gangs, scrounging for food or standing in line for a daily 
bowl of soup at the temple, avoiding the heavy hand of the local 
constables. You were always hungry, but you had the freedom 
to do as you pleased, and from time to time a generous passerby 
might give you a few coppers to run a quick errand or deliver 
a message. You spent a great deal of time dodging a gang of 
Guttersnipes grow up on the street, taking whatever they can get
Illus. by M. May
620_95374_Ch5.indd   132620_95374_Ch5.indd   1322/8/06   4:07:17 PM2/8/06   4:07:17 PM

133
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
toughs who only seemed interested in making you steal on 
their behalf. You made up your mind that if you were going 
to be the one stealing, then you would be the one to pick the 
time and place, determine what was and wasn’t an acceptable 
level of risk, and reap the benefi  t if you pulled it off.
 Transition:  You  couldn’t  dodge  the  gang  and  the  con-
stables forever. Perhaps you bit off more than you could chew 
in a daring robbery. After that your choice was simple: leave 
town until the heat died down or die at the hands of the 
gang’s brutal enforcers. You took to the road and found that 
your skills worked just as well in other cities as in your own. 
Adventuring offered you the chance to make a fortune and 
set something aside for the long term.
     Perhaps your burgeoning talents came to the attention of a 
small band of adventurers who needed an item liberated from 
a certain wizard’s bedchamber. While they distracted the old 
mage, you climbed the wall of his tower and plucked an amulet 
from his armoire. You made a lot of money on that job, and you 
decided this was the life for you. The victimized wizard might 
seek you out (whether you are aware of that or not) to avenge 
his loss. If your past catches up to you, you had best hope that 
your adventuring companions can help bail you out.
 At the Table: Old habits die hard. You’re accustomed to 
scrounging for basic necessities, so you tend to keep extra sup-
plies on hand—you never want to go to sleep hungry again. 
When you have spending money, you have trouble holding 
on to it. A few nights in a sumptuous inn, seven-course meals, 
and other luxuries leave you ready to strap on your equipment 
and head back into the world for another adventure. You live 
for the day and cast aside worries, long-term plans, and the 
like. That doesn’t mean that you are foolish or reckless, just 
that you appreciate the fi  ner things in l i fe. To you, it ’s obv ious 
that you should put of f hard work ti l l tomor row when there’s 
strong drink and good food to enjoy today.
MARINER
With a salty breeze in your hair and a hardwood deck under-
foot, you spent your life in a constant search for whatever lay 
over the endless horizon of the sea. You loved the sea and all 
the dangers that life aboard a sailing vessel offered. Above 
all, you enjoyed the freedom that you had on such a ship: 
freedom to travel the world, and freedom from the laws that 
govern the people living on land.
 Youth: As a young sailor aboard a ship, your life was fi  lled  
with work. Cleaning and repairing the ship took up the majority 
of your time. You also spent a fair amount of time on watch, 
keeping a lookout for other ships that could have hostile intent. 
In rare moments when you were not working, you were free to 
enjoy the passing sea, to sing songs and learn an instrument 
from another crew member, or to take lessons in navigation 
from the captain or fi  rst mate whenever they had time to give 
them. You spent time fi  shing, working in the galley with the 
ship’s cook to prepare meals, or even practicing swordplay w ith 
the master of arms in case another ship attacked yours.
 Transition: Life as a mariner is almost the same as life as 
an adventurer. You must face terrible monsters, venture into 
unknown territories, and stand ready to fi  ght for your life at 
a moment’s notice.
    Perhaps a terrible storm capsized your ship. You were 
lucky enough to make it to shore in a strange land, but you 
have no idea what happened to the rest of the crew. To make 
ends meet, you put your skill with weapons or spells to good 
use. For now, you adventure to earn enough coin to survive 
(and, if you strike it rich, someday buy your own ship). You 
want to discover what happened to your shipmates. Perhaps 
the storm had a sinister origin, and even now an unknown 
enemy plots against you.
    A run-in with pirates might have sent you on the path to 
adventure. You were captured and separated from your crew-
mates. You managed to escape, and now you have sworn to 
fi  nd and free your comrades. Perhaps your family owned the 
ship you served upon, and now you must rescue your brothers 
and sisters, parents and cousins. You have no idea where to 
begin your search, but you hope that over the course of your 
adventures you can fi  nd some clue to their location.
 At the Table: You use nautical terms in everyday conversa-
tion. Your weapon is a cutlass rather than a scimitar. You drink 
rum rather than ale. You know a lot about ships and boats, 
refer to others as landlubbers or scalawags, and never turn 
down the chance to take a sea voyage. You’ve been to dozens 
of ports around the world, and you love to talk about your 
ex ploits in each one. You have amassed a wealth of knowledge, 
tall tales, and stories. If your group fi  ghts a medusa, you might 
recall legends about a similar creature that haunts the waves. 
When you enter a port city, you prefer to stay near the docks 
and visit taverns where you can fi nd other sailors and ask 
them for news from across the seas.
NOBLE SCION
Born with a silver spoon in your mouth, you knew very little 
about living a common life. No matter what your interests, 
you had the best instructors. You had servants and soldiers 
who jumped to do your bidding and ensure your safety. 
The only higher authority you had to answer to was your 
family—particularly your parents, who were so busy with the 
administration of your bir thr ight that they lef t your education 
and upbringing to trusted servants.
 Youth:  You  toured  the  countryside  from  the  back  of  a  
pillow-laden  carriage,  sipping  freshly  squeezed  fruit  juice  
from an ice-chilled carafe. You spent entire days taking les-
sons in the warmth and comfort of your personal chambers. 
When  you  were  not  pursuing  your  own  education,  you  
diverted yourself with games, music, theater, and fl  irtations.  
You attended elegant parties dressed all in silk, with properly 
coifed hair and manicured nails. Above all, you spent count-
less hours at the court, observing your parents preside over 
those who served them, settle disputes, pass edicts, and hand 
down judgments. Some would say that you were blessed from 
birth, but you believed that the simple fact of your presence 
bestowed a blessing on others.
 Transition: Leav ing behind an easy l i fe of cost ume bal ls, 
servants, and rolling estates, you took up life as an adventurer. 
After all, the luxuriant life of a noble depends on one thing: 
money. If your family managed to lose its fortune (perhaps 
through a rival’s machinations, perhaps through simple mis-
management), you must now fend for yourself in the world. 
620_95374_Ch5.indd   133620_95374_Ch5.indd   1332/8/06   4:07:27 PM2/8/06   4:07:27 PM

134
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
If you took up the study of magic, or spent long hours work-
ing under the tutelage of a swordmaster, you already have the 
skil ls needed to become an adventurer. What once ser ved as 
an amusing diversion became the primary skill you need to 
return your family to prominence.
    Your family’s fall from grace could be more sinister in na-
ture. Your father might have betrayed his liege or sold out to 
a foreign power. When his scheme was uncovered, your fam-
ily was stripped of its title, wealth, and land. You must travel in 
secret or venture far from home, because the mere mention of 
your name is enough to 
incite a hostile response in 
your countrymen. Perhaps 
your  father  was  innocent  
and an enemy engineered 
his fall. The real villains 
managed  to  disgrace  and  
destroy a force for justice; 
you adventure to restore 
your family’s good name 
and avenge your losses.
     Alternatively,     perhaps     
you were the youngest in 
your family, and therefore 
you  were  not  in  line  to  
inherit  your  family’s  for-
tune. You were expected 
to join the clerg y or fol low 
some  other  respectable  
vocation. Horrifi  ed at the 
prospect of a life of bore-
dom, you rebelled and set 
out  on  your  own.  Your  
family might have agents 
searching for you, so you 
must travel incognito. You 
care nothing for your fam-
ily’s money and now see 
your old life as a suffocat-
ing burden. You only want 
to wander the road, defy-
ing  the  politics  and  the  
social responsibilities of 
the station that demands 
your return.
 At the Table: You are 
used to fi  ne food and com-
fortable accommodations. While 
you fancy yourself tough enough to 
live an adventurer’s life, you miss the comforts of home. When 
on the road, you would rather spend a night in an inn with a 
hot bath and a warm meal than rough it under the stars. You 
can’t help but complain about the poor food, the sour wine, 
and other minor indignities that you must endure. It’s beneath 
your dignity to whine, but sometimes you let others know 
that their best falls short of your expectations. You admire 
those whose accomplishments earn them the right for you to 
consider them your peers, but the sense of entitlement and 
arrogance  that  has  been  ingrained  in  you  since  childhood  
sometimes bubbles to the surface.
SOLDIER
From the earliest age you can remember, you were a servant in 
the army of your lord. You drilled to march, you drilled to fi  ght,  
and you even drilled to bathe and eat. Every waking moment was 
utilized to its maximum potential, and you kept moving with 
one purpose or another as long as daylight lasted. Learning to 
fi  ght, cleaning weapons and armor, and taking care of the cav-
al r y ’s steeds were only a few 
of the tasks that greeted you 
each day. No task assigned 
was  meaningless  or  trivial,  
and all of them could be ac-
complished with a sense of 
honor and pride in knowing 
that you served an organi-
zation whose purpose was 
much larger than yourself.
 Youth:  As  a  child  you  
spent your days cleaning. 
Everything  needed  to  be  
cleaned twice a day, from 
pots and pans to the horses’ 
br idles to your quar ters and 
sleeping mat. Everything 
was checked and rechecked 
to make sure it was tend-
ed properly. As you grew 
older, your responsibilities 
also grew. You were set to 
repairing  practice  dum-
mies, patching uniforms, 
and (when fortune favored 
you) exercising the horses. 
Additionally, as you contin-
ued to grow older and taller, 
you began to train with var-
ious  weapons,  becoming  
skilled in their use through 
almost constant repetition 
and practice.
 Transition: A soldier’s 
life is an ideal training 
ground  for  adventuring.  
You r k nowledge i n weap -
ons, armor, and tactics serves you 
well. Perhaps the prospect of another 
year of ta ki ng orders, cleani ng stables, marchi ng i n for mat ion, 
and obeying your offi cers grew tiresome; as an adventurer, 
you can do what you want, when you want. Perhaps you de-
fi  ed an unjust order and deserted rather than commit a war 
crime. Now you must dodge press gangs, bounty hunters, and 
old comrades if you want to keep your freedom.
     Your old mi l itar y unit might have been destroyed in bat tle, 
leaving you aimless and alone. Common labor or some other 
peaceful trade proved too boring and mundane for you. 
The noble born are guaranteed a life of luxury, 
but some individuals crave more than that
Illus. by H. Lyon
620_95374_Ch5.indd   134620_95374_Ch5.indd   1342/8/06   4:07:34 PM2/8/06   4:07:34 PM

135
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
Since you only know how to fi  ght, an adventurer’s life was 
the best fi  t for you. Although you enjoy your new life, your 
past still haunts you. Your unit’s old enemies still seek you. 
Your surviving comrades might (wrongfully) blame you for 
their defeat. Perhaps your unit’s destruction was no accident 
of war. Instead, someone wants you and your old comrades 
dead, and that individual has the ways and means to hunt 
you down one by one.
     At the Table: You have a story about a battle you took part 
in for almost every occasion. You can’t help but argue from 
an  expert’s  point  of  view,  and  at  times  you  are  too  dismis-
sive of those who lack experience in your eyes. You cry out 
orders in battle, shouting advice and encouragement to your 
comrades.  Part  of  you  thinks  that  you  simply  know  better  
than everyone else when it comes to combat, but you also feel 
a strong attachment and a sense of camaraderie with those 
who fi  ght alongside you. You want to do everything in your 
power to keep your fellow adventurers safe.
TRIBAL ORIGIN
Born  among  the  people,  you  were  raised  by  the  members  
of your extended family, all of whom participated in your 
upbringing to one extent or another. Your mother taught you 
to gather food and cook, your father taught you to hunt and 
fi  sh.  Your  grandfather  taught  you  to  
treat hide and make weapons, and 
your  grandmother  taught  you  the  history  of  your  people.  
Everyone had his or her place at home, and you experienced 
times of both joy and sorrow with all your kin.
Youth: As a child, your activities changed each day based on 
the needs of your people. Some days you gathered food with 
your mother, and others you stalked through the underbrush 
in pursuit of prey with your father. Your tasks depended on 
what was needed at the time, and you were productive for at 
least a few hours each day. You also spent a good deal of time 
in play—swimming with and running races against your 
siblings and cousins, practicing the use of weapons for hunt-
ing  and  defense  from  your  enemies,  and  playing  elaborate  
games meant to sharpen your senses and strengthen your 
body. From time to time you were even asked to stand watch 
and keep an eye out for the goblins that liked to attack your 
encampment without warning.
 Transition: The road from your tribe’s home territory 
to  the  heart  of  civilization  was  a  long  and  arduous  one.  
Perhaps you took to it freely, when the lure of cities and 
towns proved too strong. Perhaps the transition was violent 
and sudden, when a slave trader, raiding party, or other 
force from the outside world swooped in and plucked you 
from your home.
     If  you  willingly  left  home,  you  could  have  felt  a  strong  
sense of wanderlust from an early age. You always wanted to 
know what lay over the mountains. The outside world seemed 
Those of tribal origin band together for the good of all
Illus. by E. Fiegenschuh
620_95374_Ch5.indd   135620_95374_Ch5.indd   1352/8/06   4:07:43 PM2/8/06   4:07:43 PM

136
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
so  much  more  interesting  than  your  humdrum  existence,  
especially when the tribal elders told you stories of the great 
cities that stood beyond the horizon. Perhaps an old adventurer 
of the tribe, a warrior who had ventured into the world and 
returned years later with great treasure and renown, stoked 
your imagination with the tales of her adventures. As soon 
as you were old enough, you hired on with a passing caravan 
and ventured into the world.
     Events could have forced you from home. While you were 
out hunting one day, a gang of slavers captured you and sold 
you into the service of a rich merchant. After years of toil, 
you escaped and now run free. While part of you wants to 
return home, civilization has proven too intriguing to leave 
behind. You remain one step ahead of the slave lord’s boun-
ty hunters, and by improving your skills in weapons and 
magic you hope one day to foil their pursuit once and for 
all. Perhaps the slave lords destroyed your village and you have 
no home to return to. You remain in civilization to grow in 
power until you can avenge your people one day. Once you 
have slain the slave lords and burned their fortress to the 
ground, you can found a new village peopled by those you 
free from their chains.
     At the Table: You always compare the character of civiliza-
tion to that of your people and fi  nd it wanting. You are fond of 
quoting your grandmother’s sayings to drive home this point. 
Civilized folk lie, cheat, and steal from each other, actions that 
would doom a tribe in the wild. You see civilized folk as soft 
and complacent. Few of them have stalked a beast in the wild, 
and fewer still have fought off a dire wolf or displacer beast 
attack. Your origin sets you apart, but it makes you stronger, 
tougher, and more cunning than the soft-bellied folk of the 
cities.  While  you  might  be  ignorant  of  civilization  and  its  
customs, you are by no means a fool.
PERSONALIT Y 
ARCHETYPES
Each of the following personality archetypes includes a quote 
(something  a  character  corresponding  to  that  archetype  
might say), a description, and a list of classes and of traits 
that are especially appropriate to that archetype. You are not 
limited to these classes and traits; they simply represent good 
combinations for D&D characters.
AGENT
“It shall be as you command.”
    An agent adventures not for herself but for an orga-
nization or society, whether a thieves guild sends her to 
gather information, she explores new territory for an em-
peror, or she carries the name of her deity into new lands. 
An agent might be loyal to her organization, or she might 
resent her role and look for a way to escape. An agent can 
create interesting dynamics in an adventuring party, espe-
cially when she must choose between her fellow PCs and 
her organization.
          Classes:     Bard, beguiler, cleric, druid, knight, monk, 
paladin, ranger, rogue, scout, warmage, wizard.
     Traits:     Ambitious, serious.
CHALLENGER
“I mus t fi  ght him. O nly by s tr iving agains t those super ior to myself 
can I achieve greatness.”
       A challenger adventures for personal growth. He cares 
about treasure and magic only if they can further this goal, 
and he cares about fame not at all. A challenger tries to reach 
the pinnacle of achievement in his chosen path, whether that 
path is defi  ned by combat, magic, stealth, or some other abi l-
ity. He does this by throwing himself against progressively 
greater challenges, reveling in those just on the edge of his 
ability to overcome. A challenger is a good character to have 
in an adventuring party, since he does not quail under duress 
and often allows other party members to take the best trea-
sure. Indeed, some challengers see magic items as crutches, 
and they seek to attain perfection without them.
    Classes:    Barbarian, dragon shaman, duskblade, fi ghter, 
knight, marshal, monk, rogue, swashbuckler, warlock, war-
mage, wizard.
     Traits:     Bold, disciplined.
COMPANION
“Stand fi rm, Regdar. I am at your side.”
    A companion is the best ally anyone could ever hope for. 
He is loyal and dedicated, and he often shares a special kin-
ship with a particular individual. A companion supports his 
allies in all they do and never abandons or betrays them. He 
doesn’t lead, but he does offer cogent advice and support.
     Classes:     Cleric, duskblade, favored soul, fi  ghter,  knight,  
monk, paladin, sorcerer.
     Traits:     Connected, funny, loyal.
CRUSADER
“Crush the minotaurs and spread the word of Obad-Hai!”
     A  crusader  serves  a  cause.  The  cause  might  be  noble  or  
heinous, universal or personal. She could belong to an organi-
zation that shares her cause, or she could act as her individual 
beliefs demand. Either way, a crusader adventures to further 
her cause. The normal motivations for adventuring—wealth, 
power, fame, personal betterment, excitement—hold scant 
appeal for a crusader; she is happiest when she is directly 
serving her cause. She keeps her party adventuring, since 
whenever her fellow PCs don’t know what to do next, she is 
quick to suggest a course of action.
     Classes:     Cleric, druid, favored soul, knight, marshal, monk, 
paladin, wizard.
     Traits:     Bold, patriotic, religious.
DAREDEVIL
“You guys stay here. I’m going to scale the wall, sneak past the guards, 
swim the moat, have a look around, and come back.”
     A daredevil gets a rush from dangerous stunts. He is a risk-
taker and a gambler, willing to put his money, his reputation, 
and his life at stake purely for exhilaration. He’s the one who 
opens the door even though it’s probably trapped, who enters 
the cave even though there’s probably a dragon inside, and 
who puts on the necklace even though it’s probably cursed. 
He’s a valuable addition to a party, since he’s always willing 
to  take  on  the  tasks  no  one  else  wants  to  do  (and  he  often  
620_95374_Ch5.indd   136620_95374_Ch5.indd   1362/8/06   4:07:54 PM2/8/06   4:07:54 PM

137
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
has  the  skills  to  succeed  and  even  excel  at  them),  but  his  
recklessness can be his downfall—and that of his party.
     Classes:     Bard, beguiler, duskblade, hexblade, rogue, scout, 
sorcerer, swashbuckler, warlock.
     Traits:     Bold, energetic, fl  amboyant.
EXPLORER
“If  we  continue  along  this  road,  we’ll  come  to  the  fallen  country  
of Abu’nix.”
     A n ex plorer is dr iven to fi  nd new places, interesting cultures, 
and fascinating objects. When she reads a map, she looks to 
the edges and wonders what’s beyond. Her eyes fall fi  rst on the 
unknown areas : What ’s in the middle of that for-
est? On top of those mountains? Beneath that 
ocean? She is happiest when she discovers 
something new. She is dr iven to be the 
fi  rst  person  to  look  at  a  new  land,  
battle a new creature, or discover a 
new item. An explorer keeps her 
party moving, and she guaran-
tees  constant  adventure  as  
she points her companions 
toward uncharted territory.
     Classes:     Barbarian, bard, 
druid,  duskblade,  ranger,  
rogue, scout.
     Traits:     Driven, exotic.
INNOCENT
“I’ve never done anything like 
that.”
     An  innocent  might  have  
seen violence and brutality, 
but she did not participate. 
An  innocent  is  blameless  
.  .  .  so  far.  Other  charac-
ters, particularly elder ones, 
fi nd an innocent endearing 
because of this quality. An in-
nocent  might  adventure  to  
dispel her innocence, because 
she craves excitement, because 
she has no other choice, or for any 
of the other reasons characters ad-
venture. An innocent is a blank slate, 
and seeing how she maintains or 
loses her innocence creates dy-
namic tension in the adventuring 
party. Seeing her triumph despite, 
or perhaps because of, her innocence is exhilarating.
     Classes:     Bard, cleric, druid, favored soul, monk, sorcerer, 
wizard.
     Traits:     Carefree, kind, naïve.
LEADER
“Onward, men! We have those orcs on the run!”
     A  leader  leads.  Others  look  to  him  for  guidance,  and  he  
provides it. He might provide assurance and protection, or he 
might instill fear in his allies as well as his enemies. He speaks 
on his party’s behalf and organizes his fellow PCs in combat, 
shouting strategies (preferably in languages his opponents can’t 
understand). He drives the party forward outside of combat 
as well, keeping it moving toward a common goal, searching 
for adventure, and deciding which adventures to accept and 
which to decline. He might share leadership gracefully, or he 
might demand that power and position for himself. Leaders 
often, but not always, have high Charisma scores.
     Classes:     Cleric, dragon shaman, fi  ghter, knight, marshal, 
paladin, warmage.
          Traits:     Ambitious, charming.
MARTYR
“My life for you.”
        A martyr willingly and even ea-
gerly puts her life on the line 
for  a  greater  purpose.  This  
purpose  might  be  a  cause,  
an  organization,  a  specific  
person,  a  group  of  people,  
or  just  about  anything  else.  A  
martyr is willing to die to fur-
ther this purpose, and in fact 
expects to do so. However, she 
refuses to die in vain—her death 
must  have  a  greater  meaning,  and  
it must inspire others to greatness. 
A  martyr’s  selfl  essness  makes  her  a  
valuable addition to an adventur-
ing party, since she is often willing 
to sacrifi  ce herself for her compan-
ions. Her greater purpose provides 
motivation  for  adventures,  but  she  
can become self-righteous and reckless 
in her risk-taking.
          Classes:     Cleric,  druid,  favored  
soul, fi  ghter, knight, monk, paladin.
     Traits:     Kind, merciful, reformed.
MERCENARY
“If there’s gold involved, I’m in. Other-
wise, count me out.”
       A mercenary cares about ma-
terial things—chief ly gold, but also 
the  goods  and  services  that  gold  
buys,  such  as  equipment,  magic  
items, good food, and good times. 
Concepts such as morality and 
loyalty  matter  little  to  a  mercenary,  or  so  she  says.  Cir-
cumstances and good friends might make her change her 
beliefs, but money still holds a special place in her soul. 
A mercenary is a good addition to an adventuring party 
because she is easy to motivate.
    Classes:    Barbarian, bard, beguiler, fighter, hexblade, 
marshal, rogue, sorcerer, wizard.
     Traits:     Boastful, greedy.
From an early age, crusaders train in anticipation 
of the day when they’re called to action
Illus. by C. Frank
620_95374_Ch5.indd   137620_95374_Ch5.indd   1372/8/06   4:08:01 PM2/8/06   4:08:01 PM

138
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
ORPHAN
“I’ve been on my own my whole life. Always alone.”
     A n or phan has no parents, at least not that he can remember, 
or parental fi  gures in his life. He might have grown up in an 
orphanage or on the street, but in any case he spent his forma-
tive years fending for himself. This upbringing taught him 
self-reliance  and  confi  dence  but  also  distrust  of  others.  An  
orphan could be curious about his parentage and his lost past, 
and seeking answers to such questions can spark adventure. 
After he learns to trust his adventuring partners, he cleaves 
to them like the family he never had.
     Classes:     Barbarian, bard, beguiler, cleric, 
druid, fi  ghter, hexblade, monk, ranger, 
rogue, scout, sorcerer, warlock.
     Traits:     Calm.
PROPHET
“I speak the word of Pelor.”
     A prophet sees herself as the voice 
of  a  deity  in  the  world—which  
might  or  might  not  be  true.  She  
doesn’t  necessarily  crusade  or  
convert,  but  she  does  uphold  her  
deity’s  values  and  believes  that  she  
embodies  a  piece  of  that  deity  in  
physical form. Other faithful wor-
shipers gather about her, and priests 
of the faith welcome her. She prompts 
adventures  that  further  her  deity’s  ends  
and leads her party into adventures that she 
claims her deity instructed her to undertake.
    Classes:    Cleric,  dragon  shaman,  druid,  
favored soul, monk, paladin.
     Traits:     Energetic, fatalistic, religious.
REBEL
“What  has  the  kingdom  done  for  us?  
They’ve rubbed our faces in the mud 
and expected us to be grateful!”
    A  rebel  has  a  grudge  against  
established authority. He might dis-
like  all  authority,  or  his  feelings  might  be  
more focused on a single government (such as 
a kingdom), a small group (such as his family), or 
an  individual  (such  as  a  baron,  merchant  prince,  
former employer, or parent). Highly individualistic, 
a rebel engages in activities in defi  ance of authority, and he might 
actively fi ght against that authority and all its manifestations. 
Whether bitter or idealistic, all rebels value their freedom highly. 
A rebel helps an adventuring party fi  nd advent ure when he fl  ees  
from his latest escapade or puts his next plan into motion.
    Classes:    Bard,  fi  ghter,  hexblade,  ranger,  rogue,  scout,  
swashbuckler.
     Traits:     Driven.
RENEGADE
“I can never return to my place of birth. My companions are my 
home now.”
     For  some  reason,  a  renegade  cannot  go  home.  He  might  
be  a  wanted  criminal  on  the  run.  He  might  have  disgraced  
himself or be a member of a dishonored family. He might be a 
political exile or might hold beliefs counter to those currently 
in power. Perhaps his banishment will be lifted and he can 
return home after he accomplishes a specifi  c task (atoning for 
a sin, recovering a lost artifact, capturing the real criminal), 
offering a motivation for him and his companions to adventure. 
Alternatively, he could be making his way in the world as best 
he can, now that his roots to home are severed.
  Classes: Barbarian, bard, druid, duskblade, 
fi  ghter, hexblade, ranger, rogue, scout, sorcerer, 
warlock, wizard.
          Traits:     Exotic, skilled, vengeful.
ROYALT Y
“No, I’m not the princess. I just look like her.”
    This character might be a princess, a ruler’s spouse, 
or a cousin of the royal family. For some reason, she is 
roughing it as an adventurer. Perhaps tales of adven-
ture excite her, and she ran away from home to 
experience such events for herself. Perhaps 
her parents (or the court) were cruel or de-
manded unreasonable things of her, and 
she escaped. Perhaps she simply wished 
to ex per ience l i fe as an advent urer for per-
sonal or spiritual reasons (seeing fi  rsthand  
what her people’s lives are like, emulating her 
adventuring great-grandfather, or escaping 
a persistent suitor). Whatever the case, 
despite her exalted status she is large-
ly unable to draw upon her wealth, 
fame, and power in the course of 
her adventures, and she and her 
companions could be forced to dodge agents from 
home seeking to bring her back. Still, her courtly 
ex per ience prov ides valuable knowledge and 
insight, especial ly when her par t y deals w ith 
high-ranking government offi  cials.
          Classes:     Bard, cleric, fi  ghter,  marshal,  
paladin, sorcerer, warmage, wizard.
          Traits:     Calm, charming, connected.
SAGE
“That is the rare and valuable Numhatch mushroom. 
You can grind it with other additives to make a deadly 
poison, smear its juice on your skin to reduce wrinkles, or stew it 
for a tasty meal.”
     A sage knows a lot about a lot, and he enjoys spreading his 
knowledge around. He might be self-righteous and conde-
scending, or he could be humble and kind. Some sages possess 
spiritual knowledge and excel at explaining kinships, natural 
connections, one’s purpose in life, and otherwise serving as 
spiritual  guides.  Others  maintain  a  vast  store  of  concrete,  
useful information. Many specialize, and some adventure to 
improve their knowledge in a given fi eld through personal 
observation. When the PCs come across something unusual, 
they turn to a sage for advice.
Mialee the wizard 
as a mercenary
Illus. by R. Spencer
620_95374_Ch5.indd   138620_95374_Ch5.indd   1382/8/06   4:08:10 PM2/8/06   4:08:10 PM

139
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
     Classes:     Cleric, druid, sorcerer, wizard.
     Traits:     Calm, erudite.
SAVAGE
“I do not understand your ways, but I will fi  ght 
for you.”
     A savage comes from a primitive culture, 
and the trappings of civilization that the 
other PCs take for granted—metalworking, 
architecture (stone buildings), distilled al-
coholic drinks, and the like—are foreign to 
her. She greets new sights w ith wonder and 
excitement. Though her ways are primitive, 
she shares ties with the natural and spiritual 
worlds that others envy. She possesses a raw 
knowledge and wisdom that helps her and 
her allies out of diffi  cult situations. She might 
face prejudice from others, but she is a stal-
wart friend to those who treat her well. Given 
enough time in this new culture, she can as-
similate parts of it, creating a unique fusion 
of wild power and sophisticated knowledge.
    Classes:    Barbarian,  dragon  shaman,  
druid, ranger.
     Traits:     Brutal, exotic, naïve.
SEEKER
“Let  us  press  on.  The  White  Staff  could  be  in  
that cave.”
    A seeker adventures because he is look-
ing  for  something,  often  an  object  or  an  
individual. The object of his quest might 
be specifi  c  (the  White Staff of the Grimalkin) 
or general (a way to stop the disease in his 
home village). He grudgingly participates in 
advent ures that do not per tain directly to his 
quest, but the object or individual he seeks 
gives him focus and provides motivation for 
further adventures. When his allies join him 
on his adventures, a seeker provides contin-
ued impetus for additional adventures.
     Classes:     Barbarian, cleric, dragon shaman, 
duskblade,  favored  soul,  fi ghter,  knight, 
monk, ranger, scout, sorcerer, wizard.
     Traits:     Angry, driven.
SIMPLE SOUL
“Ha ha! I like you, my friend!”
     A simple soul enjoys the basic amenities 
of life: good food, good company, and good 
times. She also enjoys doing whatever she 
excels at, whether that’s slaying monsters, 
casting spells, converting the faithless, or pick-
ing pockets. A simple soul sees adventuring 
as a job—an exciting and dangerous one, but 
a job. After a hard day in the dungeons, she 
takes pleasure in sitting by the fi  re,  roasting  
mutton, and exchanging stories and gossip 
Lidda the rogue as a savage
Illus. by R. Spencer
620_95374_Ch5.indd   139620_95374_Ch5.indd   1392/8/06   4:08:19 PM2/8/06   4:08:19 PM

140
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
with her companions. A simple soul doesn’t drive the party 
toward adventure, but she is a reliable and steadfast ally.
     Classes:     Barbarian, cleric, fi  ghter,  rogue,  sorcerer.
     Traits:     Funny, skilled.
STRATEGIST
“If you wait here, and you wait there, and you distract the harpies over 
here while I cast my spells, we should take them with few diffi culties.”
     A strategist likes to think things out. He is at his best when 
he’s at a desk with a quill, planning. He plans for combat 
situations—even those he probably won’t encounter—as well 
as  other  circumstances,  such  as  the  proper  way  to  address  
the court at a victory feast, the right path to take to get to the 
dungeon, and the right spells to prepare before an encounter. 
He concerns himself with his party’s well-being; if he knows 
what he’s doing, he is a valuable asset.
    Classes:    Beguiler, duskblade, fi  ghter, marshal, paladin, 
rogue, warlock, warmage, wizard.
     Traits:     Conservative, erudite, serious.
THEORIST
“Fascinating. And I wonder what happens if I cast stone shape in 
these circumstances?”
     A theorist is equivalent to a scientist in the D&D world. She 
adventures to test her ideas and hypotheses and to see what 
happens  under  certain  circumstances.  Her  interests  could  
lie in magic, either in specifi c schools or in general (“What 
happens if I create illusions of demons in front of angels?”), 
strategy (“Try using your hammer against the vampire, and 
tell me what happens”), medicine (“Well, I guess this herb 
might help”), or anything else imaginable. A theorist adds 
energy and motivation to the adventuring party as she con-
stantly seeks new ideas to understand and new circumstances 
under which to perform experiments. Her experiences often 
produce useful knowledge, which she and her party can apply 
to other adventures in the future.
     Classes:     Cleric, fi  ghter, marshal, warlock, wizard.
     Trait:     Disciplined.
TRICKSTER
“You go in fi rst, and cover your eyes. I have a surprise for you.”
     A trickster has a mind for pranks, bluffs, lies, and surprises. 
He likes to cause trouble and excels at misleading and fooling 
others. Sometimes he tricks others purely for enjoyment; other 
times his skills serve a useful purpose. He prefers subtlety 
and persuasion over combat. With his quick wits, a trickster 
often speaks for his party, especially when the conversation 
is diffi  cult or dangerous.
     Classes:     Bard,  beguiler,  rogue,  swashbuckler,  warlock,  
wizard (illusionist).
     Traits:     Flamboyant, funny.
WANDERER
“I have no home. I have no family. I have no name.”
     A wanderer is a mysterious soul. She keeps her past to herself 
and doesn’t talk much. Perhaps something horrible happened 
to her when she was younger. Perhaps she committed an unfor-
givable crime, or was accused of a crime she didn’t commit. 
Perhaps she simply got bored. Whatever the case, a wanderer 
left her home and has been drifting from place to place ever 
since. Her vague and intriguing past can be the impetus for 
interesting adventures and roleplaying experiences.
    Classes:    Barbarian,  bard,  beguiler,  druid,  duskblade,  
favored soul, hexblade, monk, ranger, rogue, scout, sorcerer, 
swashbuckler, warlock.
     Traits:     Peaceful.
PERSONALIT Y TR AITS
Described below are thirty personality traits, adjectives that 
others might use to descr ibe your character. Select t wo to four 
of these and combine them to create a deep and believable 
character.  Each  trait  description  begins  with  a  quote  that  
epitomizes that trait.
     Some traits lend themselves to certain archetypes, classes, 
or alignments. If you are looking for a challenge to stretch 
your roleplaying skills, try selecting traits that do not seem 
obvious matches for your character’s alignment or archetype. 
Doing so makes for more interesting characters. An angry, 
fatalistic neutral good bard is more unusual, and thus more 
memorable, than a friendly, fl  amboyant neutral good bard.
AMBITIOUS
“I’ll be the greatest wizard who ever lived.”
     You  have  big  plans.  You  want  to  attain  the  highest  
heights  and  outdo  all  the  rest.  One  day  you’ll  take  your  
place in the history books, become a legend, and perhaps 
even attain godhood.
    At    the    Table: You speak of your plans and dreams. You 
make friends with powerful NPCs who might help you, 
even if you personally dislike them. The monetary reward 
for a successful adventure is nice, but the political favors and 
popularity the deed wins you are more important. You care 
little for money and gems. Instead, you always want the pick 
of magic items and artifacts the group fi  nds.  The  Leadership  
feat is a great way to start your quest for empire or undying 
glory. You consider your eager followers to be among your 
most valued assets. 
ANGRY
“You won’t like me. Ever.”
    You’re ticked off all the time. You enjoy taking out your 
anger on poor, unsuspecting monsters.
 At the Table: You spea k in cur t sentences when angered. 
When it comes time to battle a monster, you use offensive 
spells or attacks that deal massive damage. Maximize your 
Power Attack feat, or prepare evocation spells that deal large 
amounts of damage. When you are angry, you seek to dish 
out  tremendous  punishment  as  quickly  as  possible  to  vent  
your temper.
BOASTFUL
“How do you like that, huh? Want some more?”
    You’re a showoff. You gloat about your accomplishments 
and disparage your enemies—calling them names, making 
rude gestures, and otherwise taunting them.
620_95374_Ch5.indd   140620_95374_Ch5.indd   1402/8/06   4:08:28 PM2/8/06   4:08:28 PM

141
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
 At the Table: You take mementos from defeated foes and 
show them off in public. When a foe or rival challenges your 
skill, you never back down. Each strike you deliver comes 
with a personal insult to match. When a foe pulls off an 
impressive maneuver, you make a big show of your disdain. 
You might make Intimidate checks to show off your skill 
while demoralizing others.
BOLD
“Come, let us crush the enemy where he stands!”
    You are brave, eagerly risking your skin to come to grips 
with the enemy. Others might call this trait foolhardiness.
 At the Table: You lead from the front. Unless a rogue or 
ranger scouts ahead, you want to be at the forefront of any 
attack. You charge the foe in battle to bring the fi  ght to him. In 
your mind, the key to victory lies in seizing momentum. Feats 
such as Improved Initiative refl  ect your aggressive attitude.
BRUTAL
“He surrendered? Sorry, I didn’t hear it; I was too busy chopping 
off his head.”
    You show little mercy to your enemies, preferring to hit 
them until they stop moving.
 At the Table: Power Attack is your calling card if you are a 
fi  ghter. A feat such as Spell Focus (evocation) captures the feel 
of this trait for spellcasters. Too much damage is never enough. 
The more destruction you can reap, the better. Unlike an angry 
character, you fi  ght with a cold, calculating demeanor. An 
angry character with Power Attack might leap into the fray 
and convert her full base attack bonus into damage, while you 
play the odds and slowly but steadily increase your damage 
to deliver the maximum amount of punishment.
CALM
“Yes, I see the dragon. What’s the big deal?”
     You remain unfazed even in dire circumstances. You could 
be supremely confi dent, you could be otherworldly, or you 
could just be hard to impress.
 At the Table: You are the eye at the center of the storm. 
You rely on reason and rationality despite the chaos that rages 
around you. While others shout and argue, you always speak 
in calm, measured tones. When you do lose your temper, your 
friends remember the event for years to come. The Iron Will 
feat  refl ects your indomitable spirit. Even an evil wizard’s 
spells can’t break your will.
CAREFREE
“Ah, it doesn’t matter if we wake the wizard. What’s the worst he 
can do, kill us?”
     You have trouble ta king things ser iously. To you, advent ur-
ing is a big game.
 At the Table: Nothing gets you down, regardless of how 
daunting  a  situation  might  be.  You  let  the  fates  take  you  
where they may. Your attitude can prove annoying to stuffy, 
lawful  types,  but  in  the  face  of  grave  danger  your  carefree  
ways lighten the mood and bring hope to the party. The bard 
class is a great match for this trait, since its musical abilities 
refl  ect your ability to bring hope to your allies.
CHARMING
“Let me hold that for you, my lady.”
     You go out of your way to observe social niceties. You might 
or might not have ulterior motives.
 At the Table: Every word you speak is a tool calculated to 
help get you what you want. You are calm when the group 
needs a rational voice and smoothly effective when it’s time 
to take down a monster. Like a master politician, you always 
work a room, seeking to win people over and make them like 
you. Put as many ranks as possible into Diplomacy to refl  ect  
your winning personality.
CONNECTED
“You’d better not be insulting my sister.”
     You have a historical connection with one of the other 
party members. You might be siblings, childhood friends, 
or fellow students of the same master. You might like each 
other, or you might not; it ’s also possible that one or both 
of you is unaware of your connection. Perhaps one of you 
was  sent  to  protect  the  other  or  otherwise  keep  an  eye  
on her.
 At the Table: When the group faces a problem, you invari-
ably fi  nd someone who can help you. When you enter a tavern, 
you strike up a conversation with the bartender, gossip with 
the locals, and otherwise fi  t right in. You swap stories, share 
news, and make friends even in a foreign land. The Gather 
Information skill is an excellent tool to showcase this trait. 
When the group needs to learn the latest news, you draw on 
your social network to hear what’s out there.
CONSERVATIVE
“The old ways are the best ways.”
     You like order and stability. You believe that if the current 
system supports these qualities, you should work to ensure 
its longevity.
 At the Table: You prefer tried and true methods over new 
ideas. If an old trick or tactic worked before, you’d rather try 
it again than work on a new plan that might or might not be 
as effective. You are slow and deliberate, believing that rash 
thought and quick actions are a good way to get yourself in 
trouble. During a battle, you hang back and wait for your foes 
to  tip  their  hands.  Rather  than  charge,  you  prefer  to  move  
forward slowly and ready an attack.
DISCIPLINED
“An hour of meditation and prayer before sleep.”
     You are r igorous and st r uct ured i n your personal endeavors. 
This trait can manifest as constant combat training, time 
spend in meditation or prayer, monitoring the food you eat 
and the liquids you drink, and similar activities.
 At the Table: You go through an exercise or meditation 
regimen each morning. If you miss it, you feel uneasy about 
the lapse in routine for the rest of the day. In your mind, your 
body is as much a tool as your sword, armor, or spellbook. It 
needs rest and proper care. You insist on getting a full night’s 
sleep whenever possible, and you expect others to meet your 
standards. The Iron Will feat does a good job of refl ecting 
your dedication.
620_95374_Ch5.indd   141620_95374_Ch5.indd   1412/8/06   4:08:35 PM2/8/06   4:08:35 PM

142
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
DRIVEN
“I don’t care how many vampires the inscription says are beyond 
this door. I’m going to get it open.”
    You are relentless in your pursuit of tasks. You might be 
driven only when you are involved in specifi  c tasks (slaying 
demons, saving a friend), or you might be driven in every-
thing you do.
 At the Table: You never give up. Even in a hopeless situa-
tion, your impulse is to keep fi  ghting. During the game, take 
20 as often as possible—you’re determined to keep trying 
until you succeed. You steadily overwhelm obstacles with 
your tireless devotion. The force of your will batters down 
your foes. The Great Fortitude feat allows you to display your 
indomitable nature.
ENERGETIC
“Okay, we’ve killed the trolls and grabbed the treasure and bypassed 
the traps—what’s next?”
    You brim with energy. Maybe you eat too much sugar or 
ingest too much caffeine, or maybe it’s just in your nature, 
but for whatever reason, you’re always ready to take on the 
next task, challenge, or mission.
 At the Table: You never take 20. That activity requires 
patience and focus that you simply lack. In battle, you are 
always in motion. The Improved Initiative feat does a great 
job of refl  ecting your nature, as does the Tumble skill.
ERUDITE
“Our  current  plight  derives  directly  from  our  dearth  of  aureate  
remuneration.”
     You are well schooled, and you like to show it off. You use 
big words just because you can.
 At the Table: Purchase ranks in as many K nowledge ski l ls as 
possible. Spread them around if your primary skills are maxed 
out. A broad range of knowledge allows you to answer almost 
any question. Make references to the campaign setting’s past. 
An orc invasion might remind you of a previous humanoid 
incursion, and you speak of that attack at length to advise your 
al l ies. Work w ith the DM to gain access to more backg round and 
history of the campaign world that you can work into play.
EXOTIC
“Where I come from, this is normal.”
     You’re different from most people of the region. You might 
be from an atypical culture or of a different race; you could 
belong to an unusual religion or organization. Others see 
you as strange and interesting, and they might be prejudiced 
against you or attracted to you.
 At the Table: You fi nd the local practices and traditions 
fascinating. You use a distinctive greeting, and you dress in 
your native land’s garb. The Exotic Weapon Profi  ciency  feat  
is a good choice to demonstrate your culture’s unique aspects. 
Alternatively, you can fi  ght with a trident or scythe or other 
weapon that PCs rarely use. If you are an arcane spellcaster, 
choose spells that a typical member of your class rarely 
employs (new spells out of this book would be a good start). 
If you are a divine spellcaster, work with your DM to fi  nd  a  
suitable little-known deity.
FATA L IS T IC
“None of us is long for this world.”
    The end is coming. Maybe you’ll help it get here faster.
 At the Table: You fi  ght with a fanatic’s energy and convic-
tion. You are a relentless foe and a great ally. Since the world is 
about to end, you do what you can to help your allies and smite 
your foes. Place ranks in Knowledge (religion) to refl  ect  your  
mastery of dogma and prophecy. You study both your chosen 
faith and the religions of heretics, the better to fi  ght  them.
FLAMBOYANT
“With a twist of my sword, a couple of steps to the right, and . . . ha! 
The apple is sliced neatly in two!”
     You do ever y thing w ith fl  ash and panache. You’re never at 
a loss for words, and you don’t mind standing out in a crowd. 
Your dress and fi  ghting style are particularly distinctive.
 At the Table: Weapon Finesse and Combat Expertise are 
a great combination for a fi ghter who prefers speed, agility, 
and grace over brute force. A fl amboyant caster uses spells 
with dramatic visual effects, such as lightning bolt.
FUNNY
“What did the fi ghter say when asked if he liked mutton? ‘Sword 
of.’ Ha!”
    You have a sense of humor. Others might or might not 
appreciate it. Many kinds of humor exist; yours might be 
quick-witted, slapstick, pun-heavy, anachronistic, vulgar, inap-
propriate, clever, dry, sarcastic, or some combination of these.
 At  the  Table:  The  Perform  (comedy)  skill  is  perfect  for  
you. When your group goes to a tavern, you make jokes and 
do you best to entertain everyone. Even if you have amassed 
a great fortune, you still love putting on a performance at the 
local watering hole for a few coins.
GREEDY
“Let’s loot ’em!”
     You love to amass money and other forms of materialistic 
rewards. Recognition means little to you in comparison to 
the thrill you feel when you stand over a defeated monster’s 
treasure hoard.
 At the Table: The Appraise skill is your favorite tool. When 
exploring a ruin, you take the time to check over anything 
that looks valuable. While everyone else gathers an ogre lord’s 
coins and gems, you pull off his boots and armor to sell back 
in town.
KIND
“There, does that feel better?”
    You go out of your way to help people, with no desire for 
a reward in return. Others see you as a nice person.
 At the Table: You carry extra potions to heal your allies, 
along with ammunition, food, water, and other goods to keep 
the group going. When you have to choose between attacking 
a foe and using aid another to help an ally, you usually opt 
for the second choice.
LOYAL
“You can count on me.”
620_95374_Ch5.indd   142620_95374_Ch5.indd   1422/8/06   4:08:42 PM2/8/06   4:08:42 PM

143
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
     You  never  let  your  allies  down,  abandon  them,  or  betray  
them, and you stay by their sides even when it irritates them.
 At the Table: Iron Will and other feats that improve your 
saving throws are right up your alley. Even a foe’s spells 
cannot necessarily prevent you from helping your allies.
MERCIFUL
“He surrendered. Let’s let him go.”
    You show leniency to defeated enemies. You might have 
ulterior motives for your generosity.
 At the Table: When facing a badly injured foe, use a free 
action to offer it the option to surrender. Ready an attack to 
strike if it keeps fi ghting you.
NAÏVE
“Why is that person angry at me?”
     You  are  inexperienced  and  perhaps  led  a  sheltered  exis-
tence before becoming an adventurer. You sometimes make 
mistakes because you don’t know any better, but you mean 
well, and your naïveté lends you a certain charm.
 At the Table: You make social gaffes due to your insular 
outlook. Whi le others nav igate sit uations w ith tact and aplomb, 
you stumble ahead like a bull in a china shop. Avoid placing 
ranks in Charisma-based skills, particular Gather Informa-
tion and Intimidate. A poor Wisdom score, and the attendant 
low Will save, illustrates your naïve nature.
PAT R IOT IC
“For the glory of the queen!”
    You are devoted to your country, right or wrong.
 At the Table: You prefer to fight in your homeland’s 
traditional style. Your weapons, armor, and spells are more 
than simple tools—they are symbols of your homeland. Feats 
such as Weapon Focus and Spell Focus illustrate your tight 
bond with such symbols.
PEACEFUL
“Wait, this does not have to end in bloodshed!”
     You dislike combat and killing, preferring to use diplomacy, 
subtlety, trickery, and other nonviolent means to solve your 
problems. However, when there is no other choice, you draw 
steel alongside your allies.
 At the Table: The Diplomacy skill is your best asset, since you 
can use it to smooth out confrontations that might otherwise 
turn violent. Whenever you have a chance, step into a situation 
and use a few carefully considered words to defuse tensions.
REFORMED
“I  used  to  kill  people  for  money,  but  that  was  in  another  part  of  
my life.”
    You have gone through a signifi cant life change. Perhaps 
you’re an ex-criminal turning over a new leaf or a new devotee 
of a religion. Perhaps you’re a former nice guy who has decided 
that kindness doesn’t pay.
 At the Table: A few ranks in Hide and Move Silently betray 
your past. You might also invest skill points in Open Lock 
and Search, depending on the sorts of crimes you once took 
part in.
RELIGIOUS
“Kord grant me strength.”
     You  revere  a  higher  power.  You  might  worship  a  single  
deity, or you might include all the gods in your prayers.
 At the Table: Knowledge (religion) is more than a source 
of trivia and information for you. It provides you counsel and 
advice in almost any situation. When you argue with others, 
you cite scripture and religious teachings as important points 
of debate.
SERIOUS
“How can you think of dancing at a time like this?”
    You take everything seriously and have little or no sense 
of humor.
 At the Table: You grumble when others make jokes or venture 
off topic. During a planning session, you are the one who calls 
for order and keeps things organized. Invest a few ranks in 
Knowledge skills to give you the experience and insight needed 
to back up your demand for focus and careful planning.
SKILLED
“Spiced crab legs tonight!”
     Before you were an adventurer, you were a skilled at some 
other trade. You might have been a blacksmith, a chef, a shep-
herd, a dancer, a sneak thief, or just about anything else.
 At the Table: Invest ranks in Profession and Craft skills. 
Whenever you have the chance to use them, leap at the oppor-
tunity. Depending on the nature of your skills, you might carry 
a full set of tools even into a dangerous dungeon. For example, 
a skilled cook insists on carrying the group’s food and prepar-
ing a nice meal each evening, while a skilled dancer looks for 
likely partners at the local tavern and accepts invitations to 
the local lord’s ball as a matter of course.
VENGEFUL
“Giants? Wipe them out. All of them.”
     You  have  a  grudge  against  a  particular  creature  type,  
organization, country, or individual. Perhaps the offenders 
killed your family, burned your village, or kicked you when 
you were little.
 At the Table: Take a level of ranger to gain the favored 
enemy class feature against your chosen foe. Make notes 
on each opponent you face and track the reasons you have 
to seek vengeance against them. The Power Attack feat, or 
spells that deal lots of explosive damage, are good choices to 
mete out punishment against your chosen foes.
BEING A GOOD PLAYER 
AT T HE TABLE
This section offers some specifi  c ideas on how to make each 
game  session  a  more  enjoyable  experience  for  you  and  for  
everyone else at the table.
MANAGING THE PAPERWORK
Every D&D player uses a lot of paper. You have a character 
sheets that might be many pages in length. You might also have 
sheets that list the spells available to you, your equipment, 
620_95374_Ch5.indd   143620_95374_Ch5.indd   1432/8/06   4:08:49 PM2/8/06   4:08:49 PM

144
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
pages  of  notes  from  adventures  present  and  past,  and  your  
plans  for  the  future.  In  addition,  you  probably  have  books  
like this one lying around the playing space.
     The  following  bits  of  advice  can  help  you  manage  this  
paperwork.
 Write Everything in Pencil: This caveat is most impor-
tant when it comes to your character sheet. Since the numbers 
and names that summarize your character’s abilities will 
change over the course of your character’s career, and even 
during specifi  c adventures or rounds, you want to be able to 
mark the changes on your character sheet. Eventually, your 
character sheet will be smudged and torn from writing, eras-
ing, and rewriting; feel free to treat yourself to a new sheet 
at this point.
 Do Things the Same Way Your Friends Do: If you and 
the other players keep track of your characters’ statistics in 
the same way, you save time and effort when one player can’t 
show up and another has to take control of his character. How 
do  you  record  hit  points?  Attack  bonuses?  Used  spells?  It  
helps to talk about these details and settle on a standard way 
of doing things. This way, you can spend less time trying to 
decipher a friend’s code and more time playing the game.
 Keep Track of Your Character Sheet: Losing your char-
acter sheet is bad. You then have to recreate the character as 
best you can or, in extreme circumstances, scrap it and start 
a new character. If you discover your sheet is missing at the 
beginning of a session, you delay the game and waste your 
fellow players’ time. Make sure you store your character 
sheet properly and, if you cannot make it to a game session, 
send it along with one of your friends. Better yet, your DM 
could keep backup copies of all your group’s character sheets, 
updated on a regular basis, so he can assign someone to play a 
character as an NPC in the event of that player’s unexpected 
absence.  Some  DMs  play  custodian  for  all  their  players’  
character sheets, collecting them at the end of a session and 
passing them out again at the beginning of the next—thereby 
absolving you of all responsibility in the matter.
 Use Page Notations: Inevitably, you’ll have to fl  ip  through  
a rulebook at some point, perhaps to look up exactly how a 
feat, spell, or special ability functions. You can save time in 
this process by writing down page and book references on 
your character sheet for any complex or unusual feature. For 
example, if you select a spell from this book, next to it you 
might write “PH2 105,” indicating the book and page number 
where the description is printed.
 Know  What  Your  Stuff  Does:  Even better than page 
notations, it ’s best i f you simply know how your spel ls, feats, 
items, and special abilities function. When in doubt, quickly 
review them before a session.
 Plan Your Combat Actions: When it’s not your turn in 
combat, you should be thinking about what you’re going to do 
when it is your turn. Flip through a rulebook and make sure 
you know the pertinent details about the spell you are going 
to cast. Then, when your turn comes up, the other players 
don’t have to wait for you to fi  gure out what you want to do. If 
possible, also have a backup plan in case things change sud-
denly before your turn (new foes enter the battle, the character 
you had planned to attack goes down, or the like).
 Keep  Track  of  Timed  Effects:  Many  spells  and  other  
effects have durations measured in rounds. If you employ such 
a  spell  or  ability,  it’s  your  responsibility  to  keep  track  of  the  
duration (the DM has plenty of other things to worry about). 
One good way of keeping track of time is to make tally marks 
on a piece of scrap paper. Another technique is to use a die to 
keep track of the time—either count up for the total duration 
or count down for time remaining; at the start of your turn each 
round, turn the die to the next number. Be careful, though, 
that you don’t accidentally roll this “duration die.”
 Rely on DM A rbitration: Playing the game is more impor-
tant than looking up rules. Good Dungeon Masters don’t like 
ta king time away from the game to page through r ulebooks, 
and so they often provide instant rulings on debated topics 
instead of suspending gameplay for a time-intensive rule 
search. Go along with the DM’s arbitration, and then after 
the game or during a break you can look up the offi  cial  rule  
and let your DM know; this information will be useful the 
next time that rule comes up.
 Have All Pertinent Statistics on Hand: If your character 
has a familiar, animal companion, mount, cohort, or similar 
ally, make sure you have the proper statistics handy.
 Use Electronic Aids: While they are by no means necessary, 
laptop computers and PDAs are valuable assets. They cut down 
on search time and on table clutter. You can keep an electronic 
character sheet and update it when you attain a new level or take 
poison damage. (Electronic character sheets also reduce the risk 
of losing a character sheet—and if you lose your laptop, you 
have bigger problems to worry about.) Numerous software pro-
grams that help you create D&D characters and use electronic 
character sheets are available. The System Reference Document 
is available for free on the Wizards of the Coast website, and it 
includes most of the spells and feats in the Player’s Handbook. 
Ty p i n g   “ C t r l -F,   fi  reball” is much faster than paging through 
a book searching for the appropriate reference.
ROLLING CONVENTIONS
You roll a lot of dice in a typical D&D game. The following 
are common rolling conventions that you can use if you like; 
they accelerate gameplay and reduce ambiguity.
 Decide What to Do if the Dice Land Cocked: You, you r 
fellow players, and the DM should agree on what to do if a die 
lands on the fl  oor or ends up cocked against a book (or a DM 
screen, or a can of soda, or a pizza box). Do you reroll the die? 
Take the result from the fl oor? Move the book and let the die 
fall naturally? Any of these options is fi  ne, but you should decide 
before the start of a new campaign and be specifi  c.  The  same  
rules should apply to all the players as well as the DM.
 Supply Your Own Dice: Though everyone can share the 
same set of dice, play proceeds faster and smoother if every 
player has his or her own dice. You should have all the dice 
you think you need to play your character, so that you don’t 
have to bor row dice from the other players. (D&D players are 
also  infamous  for  having  superstitions  about  other  people  
touching their dice, and you don’t want to come between a 
D&D player and her superstitions.)
 Roll Attack and Damage Dice at One Time: If you’re 
in a large group and combat is taking an inordinate amount 
620_95374_Ch5.indd   144620_95374_Ch5.indd   1442/8/06   4:08:56 PM2/8/06   4:08:56 PM

145
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
of time at the table, consider streamlining your dice rolling. 
When making an attack, roll the d20 for your attack roll and 
the die or dice for your damage roll at the same time. (For ex-
ample, if you are attacking with a +2 fl aming longsword, roll a 
d20, a d8, and a d6 all at the same time.) If your attack roll is 
successful, you know how much damage you deal and thus 
save yourself a second roll. (Rolls don’t take a long time, but 
you make so many of them that 
anything  you  can  do  to  ac-
celerate them is good for 
the game.) If your attack 
is  unsuccessful,  ignore  
the damage.
     This  technique  encoun-
ters problems when it meets 
with abilities that allow you to 
alter your chance to hit after you 
make  your  attack  roll.  For  
example, action points (de-
scribed in Unearthed Arcana 
and the Eberron Campaign 
Setting) allow you to add 1d6 to your attack 
roll’s result after you roll the die, if you so choose. If 
you make your attack rolls and damage rolls simul-
taneously, you are more likely to spend that action 
point if your damage roll is high. To avoid these circumstances, 
roll the attack and damage dice separately if you have action 
points or a similar ability that can turn a miss into a hit.
Roll Multiple Attacks at One Time: If you have more than 
one attack, and you know you are going to use them all against 
the same target, regardless of how the fi  rst one turns out, roll all 
your attack dice at the same time. If you also roll damage simul-
taneously, as suggested above, you need some way to determine 
which damage dice belong to which attack. You might use 
color-coded dice (see below) or roll them with separate hands 
on opposite sides of a barrier (such as a book).
Use Color-Coded Dice: You can use dice of certain colors 
to designate specifi  c attacks and damage types. For example, 
if you make two attacks and roll the attack and damage dice 
at the same time, using d20s of different colors and damage 
dice that match those colors avoids confusion. For example, 
when you are making two attacks in the same round that 
each deal 1d8 points of damage if successful, roll a yellow 
d20, a yellow d8, a red d20, and a red d8 all at the same time. 
You can also use color-coded dice to specify different damage 
types. When you shoot the demon with your +2 holy fl  aming 
shock longbow, roll two white d6s for the holy damage, a red 
d6 for the fi re damage, and a yellow d6 for the electricity 
damage. This technique is helpful because some monsters 
are resistant or vulnerable to specifi  c damage types.
RESPECT THE SPOTLIGHT
Players take turns in a D&D game, and not just in combat. 
Characters always want to perform various activities, and the 
DM can focus on only one at a time. The spotlight consists 
of the DM’s attention, and the game’s current focus. Which 
character is active? Which player is telling the DM what he 
wants his character to do? That player has the spotlight.
    The spotlight is a fun place to be. That’s when you are 
active, when you are playing the game to its utmost potential. 
Because it’s a good time, sometimes players are tempted to 
claim more than their fair share and remain in the spotlight 
for a disproportionate amount of time.
    Players who hog the spotlight are bad for the game, because 
they  decrease  everyone  else’s  involvement  and  therefore  their  
fun. If you fi  nd yourself often demanding the DM’s attention—
if your character likes to do things such as head into town 
to pick pockets, rob houses, chat with the priestesses 
at the local temple, play music in inns to 
make a few gold pieces, and the like—
be conscious of it. Some activities of 
this nature are fi  ne, and they add 
depth and realism to your char-
acter and to the game world, 
but you don’t want to take a 
great deal of time away from 
your fellow players. When 
another player gets her time in 
the spotlight, let her have it—as 
long as she doesn’t abuse it.
        A  couple  of  spotlights  deserve  
special mention.
    The NPC-Interaction Spotlight: Roleplaying 
interactions with NPCs is one of the most enjoyable activities 
in a D&D game, and every player who wants to participate 
should have a chance to do so. Even if the party has a member 
who serves as its spokesperson—a charismatic bard or paladin, 
for example—a good DM supplies opportunities for other 
players to interact with NPCs. Perhaps the paladin is otherwise 
occupied, or maybe the party runs into a nefarious individual 
for whom the rogue would be a better choice to carry on discus-
sions. Maybe an old acquaintance or relative of one of the other 
characters shows up. Whatever the case, be respectful of the 
NPC-interaction spotlight and of your fellow players. If they 
look bored, relinquish the spotlight in good grace.
    The    Dungeon    Spotlight:    Dungeons are big places with 
lots of doors and hallways. It is easy for a character, especially a 
stealthy one, to head out on his own and do a bit of exploring—
and perhaps some combat and treasure-looting—away from 
the rest of the party. This strategy strains the game, because 
the DM must then split her attention and time between the 
solo character and the rest of the party. If you fi  nd  yourself  
tempted to break away from the party, you might want to ask 
the other players fi  rst. (“What do you think about me scouting 
down this passageway?”) If your character simply wanders off, 
forcing the DM to take time away from the other players, they 
might (rightly) resent you for it—so don’t do it. You might 
make the claim, “But this is what my character would do!” If 
that’s the case, rethink your character concept. The game is 
at its most enjoyable for everyone when the characters help 
each other and every player has a satisfying amount of time 
in the spotlight.
OTHER CONCERNS
The  following  pieces  of  advice  are  also  helpful  but  do  not  
involve rolling dice or managing paperwork.
Color-coded dice make 
rolling faster and easier
Illus. by M. Schley
620_95374_Ch5.indd   145620_95374_Ch5.indd   1452/8/06   4:09:03 PM2/8/06   4:09:03 PM

146
CHAPTER 5
BUILDING YOUR 
IDENTITY
Avoid Distractions: D&D games often take place in areas 
surrounded  by  potential  distractions:  TVs,  video  games,  
books,  and  the  like.  Since  you’re  spending  time  with  your  
friends, another temptation is to chat and joke at the expense 
of the game. While some of this sort of activity is fun, and 
you play D&D to have fun, don’t let the entire session pass 
in idle banter or witty repartee—especially if some players 
are not partaking in it.
     In general, keep your attention focused on the game. Your 
fellow players might think you rude if you leave the table to 
sur f the Inter net or play v ideo games, or i f you distract other 
players with side conversations.
Help Your DM: The DM does a lot of work. If you clear 
off the table, get the pencils out, and otherwise prepare the 
playing space, he or she will appreciate it.
TALK ABOUT YOUR CHARACTER
D&D characters are at their best when they are more than 
just collections of numbers and words written on character 
sheets. This chapter discusses ways to add depth, motivation, 
and  realism  to  your  character,  but  these  techniques  are  of  
limited  use  if  you  keep  them  to  yourself.  You  should  talk  
about your character.
    Tell the other players about her. When the other characters 
fi  rst meet her, what impression do they get? How does she look? 
How does she move? Many players fi  nd fun and satisfaction 
in roleplaying their character’s initial interactions with the 
other characters. The way she talks and the things she says 
add enjoyment and verisimilitude for all involved. Even if your 
character is the silent, mysterious type, describe some of her 
actions. Do her eyes dart constantly about, examining the area 
for trouble? Does she stare morosely into her drink? Does she 
rub an old scar on her neck every so often? All these types of 
behavior make your character seem more like a real person.
    Many    D&D campaigns  begin  with  strong  player  
characters—they  have  interesting  histories,  developed  
personalities,  and  distinctive  appearances.  However,  often  
these  valuable  details  fade  over  the  course  of  adventuring.  
Players are pretty good at remembering their own characters, 
but they sometimes forget the histories, appearances, names, 
or even gender of the other characters. Therefore, continued 
discussion about your character is important. Interact with 
one  of  the  other  PCs  or  an  NPC  to  keep  your  character’s  
personality fresh in everyone’s mind. Mention how he walks 
or looks when he meets a new character or encounters a new 
challenge; describe how a new piece of equipment fi  ts in with 
the rest of his appearance.
    The best characters in movies and novels change as the 
story progresses, and the best characters in a D&D game are 
no different. How does your character evolve over the course 
of her adventures? What life-changing events have occurred 
to her? How are her beliefs, values, and views about the other 
characters different from what they were before?
     Talking about your character and inserting characteristic 
details into the game make for a more fun and memorable 
time for everyone at the table.
Gimble demands the spotlight
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel
620_95374_Ch5.indd   146620_95374_Ch5.indd   1462/8/06   4:09:12 PM2/8/06   4:09:12 PM

very game has moments when particular characters 
shine. Players might tell and retell the story of the 
fi  ghter taking out the ogre, or the rogue disabling the 
trap, or the wizard dispelling an enemy’s magical 
defenses, or the cleric destroying the vampire. But 
such moments of glory are only part of what makes the D&D 
experience so exciting. The deeds of individual characters 
might be the stuff of game-table legends, but it’s their teamwork 
that gets the job done in one adventure after another.
     Team play is perhaps the most important aspect of the D&D 
game. Certainly solo play can be rewarding, but answering the 
call to adventure as a group is far more entertaining. In a group, 
the interplay between differing points of view brings both 
players and characters into confl  ict from time to time. When 
they learn to resolve their differences and pull together toward 
a common goal, they can achieve far greater results than any 
of them—no matter how powerful—could achieve alone.
     This chapter examines what it means to be an advent ur ing 
party and how parties fi  t together within a campaign setting. 
It also of fers adv ice for becoming a bet ter team player and for 
making the most of your group, whatever its composition.
PARTY BACKGROUNDS
In many campaigns, the reasons why a particular group of 
adventurers came together in the fi  rst place are either glossed 
over or passed off as mere circumstance. At most, a couple 
of  intrepid  roleplayers  might  establish  a  relationship  by  
making  their  characters  siblings,  childhood  friends,  or  
past lovers—or they could even concoct a shared event in 
their past, such as a debt that bound them together. But 
few groups extend this concept to the entire party.
     Establishing a party’s reason for existence can enhance 
the roleplaying experience, promote teamwork, and play 
a key role in keeping the group together in the face of 
the inevitable confl  icts and disagreements. If the players 
know why the characters began working together in the 
fi  rst place, the ties between them immediately become 
stronger, and individual players are encouraged to work 
together as a team.
    One way to build a strong group is to select a party 
background. Each of the backgrounds detailed below 
describes a shared event, commitment, or state of being 
that can help to hold a party together. These backgrounds 
can be used as w r it ten, or they can ser ve as g uidel ines 
for creating others.
CHARTER
The concept of a charter was fi  rst introduced in the 
FORGOT TEN REALMS  campaign  setting.  Essentially,  
your characters for m their own organization by becom-
ing a group of adventurers for hire.
    Establishing a charter takes a bit of work up front. 
To avoid con fl  icts later, everyone at the table should be 
147
Illus. by R. HorsleyIllus. by R. Horsley
620_95374_Ch6.indd   147620_95374_Ch6.indd   1472/8/06   4:10:38 PM2/8/06   4:10:38 PM

148