CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
     Each package specifi  es a race, ability scores (which include 
racial modifi  ers), skills, feats, gear, and if appropriate, spells 
and  class  features.  The  skills  all  have  maximum  ranks—4  
ranks in each class skill and 2 ranks in each cross-class skill. 
(Cross-class skills are designated by the letters “cc.”) Spells in 
parentheses are available only if your character’s key ability 
score for spellcasting is high enough to grant a bonus 1st-level 
spell (or, if the character is a wizard, her Intelligence bonus 
is high enough to grant bonus spells in her spellbook). The 
class features section appears only for characters who have 
optional  class  features  available  at  1st  level,  such  as  clerics  
(domains),  druids  (animal  companions),  and  sorcerers  and  
wizards (familiars).
     You can use these starting packages in any way you like. You 
are welcome to swap one skill for another, one feat for another 
(provided that your character meets the prerequisites), one 
spell for another, or one piece of gear for another of roughly 
equivalent value (within 5 gp). With a couple of exceptions, 
the starting packages in this book use only information 
available in the Player’s Handbook. Thus, if you have access 
to other rulebooks, you might want to swap out a few feats 
or weapons for options provided in those publications. The 
class features are likewise customizable.
     Most  packages  include  the  standard  adventurer’s  kit—
backpack, belt pouch, bedroll, fl int and steel, two sunrods, 
ten days worth of trail rations, 50 feet of hempen rope, and 
waterskin. (Monks don’t get the sunrods because they have 
too few gp at 1st level.)
BEGUILER
“You know me. I’m as good as my word, and my life is an open book.”
—said with a straight face by Anastria Nailo, 
half-elf beguiler
Some hold truth to be the greatest virtue, but it can do 
more damage than fiction. Everyone lives in a constant 
state  of  deception.  White  lies,  false  smiles,  and  secret  
thoughts keep society running smoothly. Honesty is a virtue 
only up to a certain point. Beguilers understand these ideas 
better than anyone, and they use deception, misunderstand-
ing, and secrets as skillfully as a soldier employs weapons 
of war.
    Beguilers see lying and manipulation as tools. Just as a 
hammer can be used to build a house or crack a skull, deceit 
and the ability to control others can be used for good or ill. 
A lie whispered in the right ear can ruin lives, but a dishon-
est smile and honeyed words can open doors, turn foes into 
friends, and even end wars. Beguilers have reputations as 
rakes, thieves, spies, and puppet masters, but they can also 
be diplomats, peacemakers, or heroic leaders who give hope 
in desperate situations.
     If  you  delight  in  manipulating  others,  either  to  their  
disadvantage or for their own good, then the beguiler is the 
class for you. More than any other kind of character, you rely 
on Charisma-based skills to change the reactions of others, 
while your other class abilities enable you to catch others off 
guard with devastating spell-based attacks.
MAKING A BEGUILER
As a beguiler, you possess many useful skills and spells. 
If your adventuring group lacks a rogue, you make a great 
substitute for all but the rogue’s melee combat strengths. If 
the group lacks a wizard or other arcane caster, you can also 
fi ll that role with your command of illusions and enchant-
ments, although you lack a wizard’s array of spells that deal 
damage and you possess less spellcasting versatility. Your 
main strategy should be to control enemies, bolster your 
allies, and take command of the battlefi  eld.
 Abilities:  Beguilers  have  quick  wits,  deft  hands,  and  
compelling  personalities.  You  need  a  high  Intelligence  to  
get the most from your spells and skills. A high Charisma 
helps you be more convincing in your deceptions, while a 
high Dexterity helps you with the sneaky tasks you are likely 
to pursue. Don’t neglect Constitution; although you have the 
same Hit Die as a rogue, your Constitution score infl  uences  
your  ability  to  cast  defensively  and  thus  how  well  you  can  
use your surprise casting class feature.
 Races: Beguilers can be found among any race, but gnomes 
and hal f-elves seem to most appreciate the beg ui lers’ fl  exible  
philosophy about truth. Being tricksters and inquisitive by 
nature, gnomes gravitate to the beguiler class due to the 
interesting deeds it allows them to accomplish. Half-elves, 
trapped as they are between the worlds of elves and humans, 
fi  nd that a beguiler’s abilities help them better exist in both. 
Humans,  elves,  and  halfl  ings  also  foster  beguilers  in  their  
midst, but dwarves and half-orcs rarely become members of 
the class. Dwarves tend to dislike dissembling, and half-orcs 
typically lack the mental discipline and likable personality 
required to make a good beguiler.
 Alignment: The beguilers’ outlook about truth is neither 
good nor evil, and beguilers of all alignments walk the world. 
Nevertheless, those well practiced in the arts of deception and 
manipulation rarely put much stock in others’ laws, and they 
often display a self-centered attitude. Lawful good beguilers 
are like lawful good necromancers—rare and foreign even 
to their fellows.
 Starting Gold: 6d4×10 gp (150 gp).
     Starting     Age:     As wizard (PH 109).
CLASS FEATURES
Your spells and skills make you well suited to espionage and 
dungeon delving. In addition to being able to fi  nd and disarm 
traps your group might encounter, you can charm and con-
found guards, turning what could be dangerous encounters 
into simple steps toward your goal. In combat, you can use 
your spells to trick and outmaneuver foes.
     Weapon and Armor Profi  ciency:  Beguilers are profi  cient  
with  all  simple  weapons  plus  the  hand  crossbow,  rapier,  
shortbow, and short sword. Beguilers are profi  cient  with  light  
armor, but not with shields.
 Spells: A beguiler casts arcane spells, which are drawn 
from the beguiler spell list on page 11. When you gain 
access to a new level of spells, you automatically know all 
the spells for that level on the beguiler’s spell list. You can 
cast any spell you know without preparing it ahead of time. 
Essentially, your spell list is the same as your spells known 
620_95374_Ch1.indd   6620_95374_Ch1.indd   62/8/06   2:53:16 PM2/8/06   2:53:16 PM

7
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
l ist. You also have the option of adding to your ex isting spel l 
list through your advanced learning class feature (see below) 
as you increase in level.
    To cast a beguiler spell, you must have an Intelligence 
score of 10 + the spell’s level (Int 10 for 0-level spells, Int 11 
for 1st-level spells, and so forth). The Diffi  culty Class for a 
saving throw against a beguiler’s spell is 10 + the spell’s level + 
the beguiler’s Int modifi  er. Like other spellcasters, a beguiler 
can cast only a certain number of spells of each spell level 
per day. The base daily spell allotment is given on Table 1–1. 
In addition, you receive bonus spells for a high Intelligence 
score (PH 8).
    A beguiler need not prepare spells in advance. You can 
cast any spell you know at any time, assuming you have not 
yet used up your spells per day for that spell level.
 Armored  Mage  (Ex):  Normally,  armor  of  any  type  
interferes  with  an  arcane  spellcaster’s  gestures,  which  
can cause your spells to fail if those spells have a somatic 
component.  A  beguiler’s  limited  focus  and  specialized  
training, however, allow you to avoid any chance of arcane 
spell failure as long as you restrict yourself to light armor. 
This training does not extend to any other form of armor, 
nor does this ability apply to spells gained from other spell-
casting classes.
 Trapfi  nding: Beguilers can use the Search skill to locate 
traps when the task has a Diffi  culty Class higher than 20. 
Finding a nonmagical trap has a DC of at least 20, or higher 
if it is well hidden. Finding a magic trap has a DC of 25 + the 
level of the spell used to create it.
     Beguilers can use the Disable Device skill to disarm magic 
traps. A magic trap typically has a DC of 25 + the level of the 
spell used to create it.
     A beguiler who beats a trap’s DC by 10 or more with a Dis-
able Device check can study a trap, fi  gure out how it works, 
and bypass it (with his allies) without disarming it.
 Cloaked Casting (Ex): Starting at 2nd level, a beguiler’s 
spells become more effective when cast against an unwary 
foe. You gain a +1 bonus to the spell’s save DC when you cast 
a spell that targets any foe who would be denied a Dexterity 
bonus  to  AC  (whether  the  target  actually  has  a  Dexterity  
bonus or not).
     At 8th level, you gain a +2 bonus on rolls made to overcome 
the spell resistance of any affected target.
    At 14th level, the bonus to your spell’s save DC increases 
to +2.
     At 20th level, you become able to automatically overcome 
the spell resistance of any affected target.
 Surprise Casting (Ex): Starting at 2nd level, when you 
successfully use the Bluff skill to feint in combat, your 
target is denied its Dexterity bonus (if it has one) to AC for 
the next melee attack you make against it or the next spell 
you cast. You must remain in melee with the target, and the 
attack must be made or the spel l cast on or before your nex t 
turn. The target is not considered fl  at-footed and therefore 
can make attacks of opportunity against you if you do not 
cast defensively.
     At 6th level, you gain the ability to feint in combat as a move 
action instead of a standard action. If you have the Improved 
Feint feat, you can now feint in combat as a swift action.
 Advanced Learning (Ex): At 3rd level, you can add a 
new spell to your list, representing the result of personal 
study and experimentation. The spell must be a sorcerer/
wizard spell of the enchantment or illusion school and of 
a level no higher than that of the highest-level spell you 
Table 1–1: The Beguiler Hit Die: d6
             Base
 Attack     Fort     Ref     Will      — Spells per Day —
Level     Bonus    Save   Save   Save    Special   0     1st   2nd   3rd   4th   5th   6th   7th   8th   9th
        1st      +0    +0      +0      +2      Armored    mage,    trapfinding    5      3     —    —    —    —    —    —    —    —
        2nd     +1    +0      +0      +3      Cloaked    casting    (+1    DC),    surprise    casting    6      4     —    —    —    —    —    —    —    —
        3rd      +1    +1       +1       +3      Advanced    learning    6      5     —    —    —    —    —    —    —    —
        4th      +2    +1       +1      +4      —    6      6      3     —    —    —    —    —    —    —
        5th      +2    +1       +1      +4      Silent    Spell    6      6      4     —    —    —    —    —    —    —
  6th +3 +2 +2 +5 Surprise casting (move action) 6 6 5 3     —    —    —    —    —    —
        7th      +3    +2      +2      +5      Advanced    learning    6      6      6      4     —    —    —    —    —    —
  8th +4 +2 +2 +6 Cloaked casting (+2 to overcome SR) 6 6 6 5 3     —    —    —    —    —
            9th      +4      +3       +3       +6      —      6      6      6      6      4      —      —      —      —      —
10th      +5      +3       +3       +7      Still      Spell      6      6      6      6      5      3      —      —      —      —
11th       +5      +3       +3       +7      Advanced      learning      6      6      6      6      6      4      —      —      —      —
12th      +6/+1       +4       +4       +8      —      6      6      6      6      6      5      3      —      —      —
13th      +6/+1       +4       +4       +8      —      6      6      6      6      6      6      4      —      —      —
14th      +7/+2       +4       +4       +9      Cloaked      casting      (+2      DC)      6      6      6      6      6      6      5      3      —      —
15th      +7/+2       +5       +5       +9      Advanced      learning      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      4      —      —
16th      +8/+3       +5       +5      +10      —      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      5      3      —
17th      +8/+3       +5       +5      +10      —      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      4      —
18th      +9/+4       +6      +6      +11      —      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      5      3
19th      +9/+4       +6      +6      +11      Advanced      learning      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      4
20th      +10/+5      +6      +6      +12      Cloaked      casting      (overcomes      SR)      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      6      5
Class Skills (6 + Int modifier per level, ×4 at 1st level): Appraise, Balance, Bluff, Climb, Concentration, Decipher Script, 
Diplomacy, Disable Device, Disguise, Escape Artist, Forgery, Gather Information, Hide, Jump, Knowledge (arcana), 
Knowledge (local), Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Profession, Search, Sense Motive, Sleight of Hand, Speak Language, 
Spellcraft, Spot, Swim, Tumble, Use Magic Device.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   7620_95374_Ch1.indd   72/8/06   2:53:23 PM2/8/06   2:53:23 PM

8
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
already know. Once a new spell is selected, it is forever added 
to your spell list and can be cast just like any other spell on 
your list.
     You  gain  another  new  spell  at  7th,  11th,  15th,  and  19th  
level.
Silent  Spell:  At  5th  level,  you  gain  Silent  Spell  as  a  
bonus feat.
Still Spell: At 10th level, you gain Still Spell as a bonus 
feat.
PLAYING A BEGUILER
Truth  lies  in  the  eye  of  the  beholder.  Manipulation  of  
truth—and others’ visions of it—is a part of life. Everyone 
does it; you just do it bet ter than ever yone else. If you nudge 
someone into doing something he otherwise wouldn’t have 
done, that person still did the actual deed, and some part 
of  him  must  have  wanted  it  done.  You  trick  fools,  charm  
egocentrics, inf luence schemers, and control the weak-
willed. In a way, you’re doing them a favor. If they’re clever 
enough  to  figure  out  they’ve  been  manipulated,  they’ll  
be better prepared to defend themselves against the later 
manipulations of those who mean them harm. If they don’t 
fi  gure it out, they’ll get tricked again, but that’s no concern 
of yours. Life is a game that you win by coming out on 
top, and the best way to do that is to convince others to 
give you a boost.
     You might adventure because you desire excitement. 
Someone with your smarts gets bored with mundane 
pursuits. Alternatively, you might have set off on 
a life of adventure after some trick or manipula-
tion gone wrong. You have to keep moving, and 
adventuring offers you a regular change of scen-
ery. In any case, a life of adventure allows you 
to see new things, meet interesting people, 
and garner a name for yourself. Of course, 
it might not be your real name, but fame 
is fame.
     You always look to expand your knowl-
edge  and  increase  your  power.  You  are  
clever enough to know there’s always more 
to learn. Although you tend to be self-
reliant, you understand the value of 
friendship and allies in your 
pursuits. Truth might be 
mutable,  but  friends  
value  honesty  and  
trust, so you make 
sure not to entan-
gle your allies in 
your webs of lies 
and trickery.
Religion
Beguilers  favor  deities  
who  share  their  unfet-
tered  outlook  and  who  
would   seem   to   appreciate   
their schemes and strategies. Most 
beguilers look to Olidammara for obvious reasons, but others 
prefer Fharlanghn since he shares their love of new begin-
nings and travel. Gnome beguilers largely put their faith 
in Garl Glittergold, and some nongnome beguilers follow 
suit. Many also follow Boccob; the Lord of All Magics cares 
little  to  what  use  beguilers  put  their  spells,  and  beguilers  
prefer it that way. Ev i l beg ui lers often join Vecna’s fold—the 
Master of A l l that Is Secret and Hidden welcomes beg ui lers, 
manipulating them toward ever greater acts of villainy even 
as they take advantage of their victims.
Other Classes
Few know of characters such as yourself because many 
beguilers pretend to be something other than what they are, 
and you can easily pass as a rogue, bard, wizard, or sorcerer. 
Those who learn of the class often have a poor impression 
of beguilers unless they call one a friend. Wizards consider 
characters such as you to be undisciplined and limited in their 
Anastria and Korrik, beguilers
Illus. by S. Prescott
620_95374_Ch1.indd   8620_95374_Ch1.indd   82/8/06   2:53:30 PM2/8/06   2:53:30 PM

9
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
magic. Knights, paladins, and monks rightly think of you as 
untrustworthy. Rangers, dragon shamans, barbarians, and 
druids rarely have patience for your prevarications and your 
enjoyment of civilized society. Rogues, duskblades, sorcer-
ers, and fi  ghters tend to be more practical: If your abilities 
make their jobs easier, then you fi  nd a welcome reception. 
Bards often fi  nd the life led by beguilers fascinating and are 
intrigued by a beguiler’s exploits.
Combat
You’re at your best when you can catch foes unaware. Use 
your spells to hide and disguise yourself and your allies 
so  that  you  can  employ  surprise  tactics.  If  you  get  into  
melee, use the Bluff skill to feint in combat and thus get 
the drop on your enemy with cloaked casting or surprise 
casting. Control the terrain with spells such as grease and 
fog  cloud.  Control  foes  with  charm  person  and  dominate 
monster spells.
Advancement
Remaining a beguiler typically presents the best course of 
advancement. The rogue class might seem like a natural 
choice for multiclassing, but you don’t gain much from taking 
levels in it. Although it gives you the sneak attack ability, it 
detracts from your spellcasting prowess.
     You should assign skill points according to your role in your 
adventuring group. If the group already has a rogue who is 
good at fi  nding traps and sneaking about, boost your ranks 
in social skills such as Diplomacy and Gather Information. 
Remember that you can use spells such as invisibility and 
silence for stealth, and spells such as knock and spider climb to 
do things for which rogues must use skills. High bonuses in 
Bluff and Concentration are a must if you’re going to use the 
surprise casting ability.
    You have many good options for feats, but be sure to take 
Combat Casting, Combat Expertise, and Improved Feint 
to get the most from surprise casting and cloaked casting. 
Complete Adventurer of fers Mobi le Spel lcasting, a feat that 
allows you to cast a spell and move as a single standard 
action. Combining this with the benefi  ts prov ided to you by 
Improved Feint and the Tumble skill, you could move into 
melee, feint, and cast a spell that gets the benefi  t  of  cloaked  
casting or surprise casting. You should also consider taking 
the Battle Caster feat from Complete Arcane, which allows a 
beguiler to wear medium armor without spell failure. Com-
bining it with the Armor Profi ciency (medium) feat gives 
you much greater protection. If you’re interested in having 
a lot of feats, it might be worthwhile to take a level of fi  ghter,  
since the 1st level of the fi ghter class gives you profi  ciency  
with  all  types  of  armor  and  a  bonus  feat  you  could  use  for  
Combat Expertise or Improved Feint.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Controller
Human Beguiler
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 15, Wis 10, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Bluff,  Concentration,  Disable  Device,  Hide,  Move  
Silently, Open Lock, Search, Sense Motive, Spot.
 Languages: Common, Goblin, Orc.
     Feat: Improved Initiative, Spell Focus (enchantment).
     Weap o ns :     Short sword (1d6/19–20),
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, spell component 
pouch, thieves’ tools, 20 gp.
Package 2: The Investigator
Half-Elf Beguiler
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 10, Int 15, Wis 12, Cha 13.
     Skills:     Bluff, Gather Information, Hide, Move Silently, Open 
Lock, Search, Sense Motive, Spot.
 Languages: Common, Dwarven, Elven, Goblin.
     Feat: Spell Focus (enchantment)
     Weap o ns :     Rapier (1d6/18–20), shortbow with 20 arrows 
(1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, spell component 
pouch, thieves’ tools, 23 gp.
Package 3: The Trickster
Gnome Beguiler
     Ability     Scores:     Str 10, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 15, Wis 8, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Bluff, Disguise, Escape Artist, Hide, Move Silently, 
Search, Spot, Use Magic Device.
Languages: Common, Giant, Gnome, Goblin.
     Feat:     Spell Focus (illusion).
     Weap o ns :     Morningstar (1d6), light crossbow with 20 bolts 
(1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy steel shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, spell component 
pouch, thieves’ tools, 40 gp.
BEGUILERS IN THE WORLD
“Just wait ’till I get my hands on her. No one makes a fool of 
Obramus Tumbor!”
—Obramus Tumbor, being made a fool of by a beguiler
The beguiler class gives players a chance to play the arche-
typal trickster. The class provides the skill set of a rogue 
and a selection of arcane spells without the complications of 
balancing multiple classes. Beguilers also make great villains. 
By manipulating NPCs and situations the PCs encounter, 
an evil beguiler can operate behind the scenes and trick the 
adventurers to his own ends.
Daily Life
The way a beguiler behaves depends on his or her individual 
sense of morality. Some think nothing of adopting false 
identities or impersonating others as a matter of course. 
They rely on their spells and their charm to get others to 
give them what they want. Other beguilers fi  nd  themselves  
driven to use their powers of persuasion to help people. 
They see the daily troubles of others and can’t help getting 
involved in solving arguments, matchmaking, and ending 
feuds. Regardless of outlook, a beguiler in a civilized area 
rarely gets bored. There’s always something to meddle in or 
some grand scheme to enact.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   9620_95374_Ch1.indd   92/8/06   2:53:42 PM2/8/06   2:53:42 PM

10
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
    Beguilers can become great leaders. With their sharp 
minds and great charisma, beguilers would be natural leaders 
were it not for their inconstancy. Beguilers regularly devise 
brilliant plans for espionage or trickery—plans that usually 
require them to play a major role—but their natural penchant 
for improvisation and secrecy often means that such plans 
possess unpredictable elements or key parts hidden from all 
other participants. If a beguiler earns the trust of companions, 
they value her leadership. Lacking that trust, a beguiler rarely 
leads for long.
Notables
Beguilers often gain notoriety for their deeds, although 
usually under a false identity. They earn fame, rather than 
infamy, when they use their abilities to serve a greater good. 
Anastria Nailo did so when she tricked an entire orc army 
into a box canyon where it could be ambushed, and again 
when she charmed a leader of a city and learned that he 
had already been charmed by a mind fl  ayer. Since she was 
pretending to be a famous elf bard at the time, Anastira can 
still maintain a low profi  le despite her famous deeds, which 
is just the way she likes it.
Organizations
Beguilers don’t organize together, but they often join other 
organizations, especially thieves guilds and secret political 
groups. A beguiler joining an organization probably has a 
specifi  c goal in mind and takes a position that best allows her 
to attain it. A long-term commitment to such a group rarely 
appeals to a beguiler, but if the organization champions a 
cause close to the beguiler’s heart, it can count on her very 
best efforts.
NPC Reactions
Few common folk understand beguilers to be different 
from sorcerers or wizards who have some rogue training, 
and many more mistake them for bards. Beguilers further 
confuse the issue by regularly adopting false identities 
and  hiding  their  varied  abilities.  Thus,  the  reaction  a  
beguiler gets from those she meets depends on what she is 
pretending to be at the time. Individuals who know about 
the beguiler class and the outlook common to its members 
greet beguilers with an attitude one step more hostile than 
normal. Paladins and knights in particular look poorly 
upon beguilers, as does anyone who puts great impor tance 
in forthrightness.
BEGUILER LORE
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana) can research 
beguilers to learn more about them. When a character makes 
a skill check, read or paraphrase the following, including the 
information from lower DCs.
 DC 15: Beguilers are arcane spellcasters who focus on 
illusions and enchantments. They employ deception and 
compulsory magic to get what they want.
 DC 20: Beguilers can cast spells in light armor, and they 
have many of the skills of rogues.
BEGUILERS IN THE GAME
Beguilers fi  t smoothly into any ongoing game, since they are 
little known and don’t require the insertion of an organiza-
tion into the world or the addition of lots of new mechanics 
to the game. You can have a beguiler fi  rst appear as a villain 
when players discover a secret manipulator behind foul deeds 
they have been investigating. A beguiler might fi  rst  appear  
as a foe and end up an ally, or the reverse could happen. A 
PC beg ui ler can be introduced to the par t y just as any rog ue, 
bard, or wizard would be.
    Think of a beguiler as similar to Loki of Norse myth or 
the Coyote in Native A mer ican tales. The player of a beg ui ler 
wants her to be smooth, sly, smart, likable, and light on her 
feet. Keeping this player happy is a matter of helping the 
player to feel that way. You might be tempted to make the 
player’s schemes go awry because that seems more interest-
ing to you, but instead you should allow good schemes to 
work most of the time. Let a player with a beguiler character 
feel empowered to try crazy ideas and dangerous plans. If 
it becomes too much of a good thing, then that’s when the 
guards see through her disguise or the villain allows the 
unwitting PCs to infi  ltrate their way into his clutches.
Adaptation
When adapting the beguiler to your campaign, look at how 
rogues and bards fit into your game. The beguiler fills a 
similar niche, and any organizations that cater to such classes 
likely prove helpful for beguilers. A thieves’ guild might have 
a small cabal of beguilers associated with it. The beguilers aid 
the guild on any missions that require their magical talents. 
In return, the beguilers receive protection, a share of the 
loot, and a headquarters. Young thieves who show a knack 
for magic might be shepherded into the beguiler class.
     In a kingdom or land where magic is common, beguilers 
might replace the typical rogue, diplomat, or spy. A bandit 
gang might consist of several beguilers and a number of 
fighters. In such lands, magic supersedes a rogue’s talent 
with skills.
     With their talent for deception, a beguiler might have a 
reputation similar to the ninja. The common folk fear the 
beguilers  for  their  ability  to  bend  minds  and  to  use  magic  
to slip away from the authorities. Every royal court employs 
a few mages charged with using their spells to ferret out 
beguilers. In this case, the beguilers are secretive, clannish, 
and diffi  cult  to  fi  nd. They gather in secret societies and never 
reveal their lore to those whom they do not trust. Becoming 
a beguiler is a process of winning the trust of one’s master, 
not simply mastering a few simple spells.
Sample Encounter
An encounter with a beguiler should highlight her use of 
sur pr ise tactics and manipulation of others to do her bidding. 
In  addition  to  charmed  or  dominated  minions,  a  beguiler  
often gathers allies under false pretenses. Fighting a villain-
ous beguiler should be tricky for the PCs, because they will be 
forced to fi  gure out who their real enemies are while trying 
to avoid hurting innocents whom the beguiler has dragged 
into the fi ght. The PCs might even have to fi gure out who 
620_95374_Ch1.indd   10620_95374_Ch1.indd   102/8/06   2:53:50 PM2/8/06   2:53:50 PM

11
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
the beguiler is, since disguises and hidden spellcasting come 
easily to such a character.
 EL 9: Unl i ke many hal f-elves, A nastr ia Nai lo always found 
it easy to live in either human or elf communities. Quick-
witted, perceptive, and naturally empathetic, she could slip 
from an elf ’s detached interest to a human’s focused drive as 
easily as she could switch speaking their languages. Always a 
mischievous charmer, Anastria found the beguiler’s abilities 
came easily to her and allowed her to do more than play at 
being a human or elf. With the spells she learned, she could 
pretend to be anyone and anything from a dwarf miner to a 
goblin shaman. For a time she lived as a gadabout, adopting 
the lives of the wealthy while they were away or impersonat-
ing loyal retainers to gain the patronage of important people. 
After foiling the plans of an orc warlord and the plot of a 
mind fl  ayer accidentally while in the guise of a famous bard, 
Anastria has gained a taste for heroics, and now she’s looking 
to make a name for herself by helping people—even if she’s 
the one who put those people in trouble in the fi  rst  place.
Anastria Nailo CR 9
Female half-elf beguiler 9
CN Medium humanoid (elf )
Init +2
Senses low-light vision; Listen +6, Spot +7
Languages Common, Dwarven, Elven, Gnome, Halfling, Orc
AC 18, touch 12, flat-footed 16
 (+2 Dex, +6 armor)
hp 43 (9 HD)
Immune sleep
Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +7 (+9 against enchantments)
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee +1 rapier +7 (1d6/18–20) or
Melee touch +6 (spell)
Ranged mwk light crossbow +7 (1d8/19–20)
Base Atk +4; Grp +3
Atk Options Combat Expertise, Improved Feint, Still Spell, 
surprise casting*
Combat Gear potion of bless weapon, potion of shield of 
faith +3
Beguiler Spells Known (CL 9th):
 4th (5/day)—Chosen from beguiler spell list
3rd (7/day)—Tasha’s hideous laughter, plus others chosen 
from beguiler spell list
 2nd (7/day)—Chosen from beguiler spell list
1st (7/day) —Nystul’s magic aura, plus others chosen 
from beguiler spell list
 0 (6/day)— Chosen from beguiler spell list
Abilities Str 8, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 18, Wis 10, Cha 14
SQ advanced learning* (Nystul’s magic aura, Tasha’s hideous 
laughter), armored mage*, cloaked casting*, trapfinding*
Feats Combat Expertise, Improved Feint, Silent Spell
B
, Spell 
Focus (enchantment), Weapon Finesse
Skills Balance +3, Bluff +14, Concentration +13, Diplomacy 
+20, Disguise +13 (+15 acting), Gather Information +11, 
Handle Animal +3, Intimidate +4, Jump +5, Listen +6, 
Search +9, Sense Motive +10, Sleight of Hand +9, Spot 
+7, Tumble +15
Possessions combat gear plus +2 chain shirt, +1 rapier, 
masterwork light crossbow with 20 bolts, cloak of 
resistance +1, headband of intellect +2, disguise kit
*Class features described on page 7
BEGUILER SPELL LIST
The beguiler’s spell list appears below. Spells printed in this 
book are marked with an asterisk.
 0 Level: dancing lights, daze, detect magic, ghost sound, message, 
open/close, read magic.
 1st Level: charm person, color spray, comprehend languages, 
detect secret doors, disguise self, expeditious retreat, hypnotism, mage 
armor,  obscuring  mist,  rouse*,  silent  image,  sleep,  undetectable  
alignment, whelm*.
 2nd Level: blinding color surge*, blur, daze monster, detect 
thoughts, fog cloud, glitterdust, hypnotic pattern, invisibility, 
knock, minor image, mirror image, misdirection, see invisibility, 
silence, spider climb, stay the hand*, touch of idiocy, vertigo*, 
whelming burst*.
 3rd  Level: arcane sight, clairaudience/clairvoyance, crown of 
veils*,  deep  slumber,  dispel  magic,  displacement,  glibness,  halt*,  
haste, hesitate*, hold person, inevitable defeat*, invisibility sphere, 
legion of sentinels*, major image, nondetection, slow, suggestion, 
vertigo fi eld*, zone of silence.
    4th    Level:    charm  monster,  confusion,  crushing  despair,  
freedom of movement, greater invisibility, greater mirror image*, 
locate creature, mass whelm*, phantom battle*, rainbow pattern, 
solid fog.
    5th    Level:    break enchantment, dominate person, feeblemind, 
friend to foe*, hold monster, incite riot*, mind fog, Rary’s telepathic 
bond, seeming, sending, swift etherealness*.
     6th     Level:     greater dispel magic, mass suggestion, mislead, 
overwhelm*, repulsion, shadow walk, true seeing, veil.
     7th     Level:     ethereal jaunt, greater arcane sight, mass hold person, 
mass invisibility, phase door, power word blind, project image, 
spell turning.
    8th    Level:    demand, discern location, mind blank, moment of 
prescience, power word stun, scintillating pattern, screen.
     9th     Level:     dominate monster, etherealness, foresight, mass hold 
monster, power word kill, time stop.
DR AGON SHAMAN
“I possess a dragon’s power. Beware lest you awaken that 
dragon’s wrath.”
—Kalia, last and greatest dragon shaman 
of the Blackspear tribe
Empires  crumble,  eons  pass,  and  even  gods  wither  and  
die, but dragons remain. Mortal but eternal, the races of 
true  dragons  weather  the  roll  of  the  ages  because  of  their  
unsurpassed  might.  Few  creatures  can  match  a  dragon  in  
its full fury, whether in a combat of arms or battle of wits. 
Dragon shamans recognize this fact and see true dragons as 
more than powerful beings. To a dragon shaman, the passing 
shadow of a dragon fl  ying overhead isn’t a sign that invokes 
fear; it’s a blessing that reveals you to be in the presence 
of greatness.
     Dragon shamans respect true dragons as power incarnate. 
Some worship dragons, but most simply aspire to gain dragon 
powers for themselves. In assuming the abilities and the 
likeness of a dragon, a dragon shaman seeks to emulate that 
might and embody that power within himself.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   11620_95374_Ch1.indd   112/8/06   2:53:56 PM2/8/06   2:53:56 PM

12
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
     If you gaze at dragons with awe and aspire to share their 
power and majesty, then the dragon shaman is the class 
for you. By choosing a totem dragon, you partake of a true 
dragon’s power and take on aspects of a particular kind 
of dragon.
MAKING A DRAGON SHAMAN
As a dragon shaman, you primarily act as a melee combatant, 
but your class features also allow you to grant benefi  ts to those 
fi  ghting around you. In a standard group of adventurers, you 
can stand in for the fi  ghter or the cleric. Your combat prowess 
isn’t quite as great as a fi ghter’s, but you can employ special 
attacks and special defenses a fi ghter can’t access. Although 
you lack many of the cleric’s specialized spells, you do possess 
the ability to heal and remove negative conditions. As a dragon 
shaman, you can grow tough scales, breathe fi  re or another 
type of energy, and soar on dragon wings—and that barely 
scratches the surface of the powers at your command.
 Abilities: As with any melee-oriented class, Strength is a 
key ability for dragon shamans. Constitution provides you 
with increased hit points as usual, and it also increases the 
save DC of your breath weapon. If you want to ma ke good use 
of the dragon shaman’s ability to heal and remove negative 
conditions, you’ll need a high Charisma.
 Races: Although humans make up the majority of dragon 
shamans, any community of people with a close connection 
to true dragons can produce dragon shamans. Typically, 
dragon shamans come from savage societies that live near 
the lairs of dragons, but even highly civilized populations 
can produce dragon shamans. In any race or society, dragon 
shamans tend to dedicate themselves to the dragons native to 
the area. Thus, elf dragon shamans from a forest nation often 
aspire to the qualities of a green dragon, whereas the dwarf 
dragon  shamans  of  a  high  mountain  citadel  would  seek  to  
gain the qualities of a silver dragon.
 Alignment: Attaining the abilities of a true dragon requires 
a deep understanding of the chosen kind of dragon. An aspir-
ing dragon shaman must ma ke a st udy of the dragon’s t y pical 
mindset and emotions; adopting these for himself opens the 
door to the dragon’s power. Thus, dragon shamans align their 
morals to suit the outlook of the color of true dragon to which 
they dedicate themselves. Each kind of metal l ic or chromatic 
dragon has a particular alignment with which it is associated. 
A dragon shaman who turns away from the alignment of his 
chosen dragon type loses many of his powers unless he can 
successful ly adopt another dragon t y pe as his chosen dragon 
(see Ex-Dragon Shamans, below). Neutral individuals with no 
preference for law, chaos, good, or evil cannot properly attain 
the outlook of a true dragon and therefore cannot become 
dragon shamans.
 Starting Gold: 4d4×10 gp (100 gp).
     Starting     Age:     As druid (PH 109).
CLASS FEATURES
As a dragon shaman, you function most effectively on the front 
lines of any combat. Your class abilities allow you to boost your 
combat effectiveness and that of your party, and the touch of 
vitality ability provides you with the power to heal others and 
remove negative conditions that a f fect them, giv ing you more 
reason to take the fi ght to your foes and stay close to those 
melee-oriented allies most likely to need your aid.
 Weapon and Armor Profi  ciency:  Dragon shamans are 
proficient with simple weapons, with light and medium 
armor, and with shields (except tower shields).
 Bonus Languages: A dragon shaman’s bonus language 
options include Draconic.
Table 1–2: The Dragon Shaman Hit Die: d10
             Base
             Attack               Fort             Ref             Will                          Draconic
Level     Bonus    Save    Save    Save       Special    Auras    Known
  1st +0 +2 +0 +2 Draconic aura +1, totem dragon 3
  2nd     +1 +3 +0 +3 Skill Focus 3
  3rd +2 +3 +1 +3 Draconic adaptation 4
  4th +3 +4 +1 +4 Breath weapon (2d6; 15-ft. cone or 30-ft. line), draconic resolve 4
  5th +3 +4 +1 +4 Draconic aura +2 5
  6th +4 +5 +2 +5 Breath weapon (3d6), touch of vitality (heal wounds) 5
  7th +5 +5 +2 +5 Natural armor +1 6
  8th +6/+1 +6 +2 +6 Breath weapon (4d6), Skill Focus 6
  9th +6/+1 +6 +3 +6 Energy immunity 7
10th +7/+2 +7 +3 +7 Breath weapon (5d6), draconic aura +3 7
11th +8/+3 +7 +3 +7 Touch of vitality (remove conditions) 7
12th +9/+4 +8 +4 +8 Breath weapon (6d6; 30-ft. cone or 60-ft. line), natural armor +2 7
13th +9/+4 +8 +4 +8 Draconic adaptation (share with allies) 7
14th +10/+5 +9 +4 +9 Breath weapon (7d6), commune with dragon spirit 7
15th        +11/+6/+1          +9        +5        +9         Draconic        aura        +4        7
16th +12/+7/+2 +10 +5 +10 Breath weapon (8d6), Skill Focus 7
17th       +12/+7/+2         +10       +5       +10        Natural       armor       +3       7
18th       +13/+8/+3         +11       +6       +11        Breath       weapon       (9d6)       7
19th       +14/+9/+4         +11       +6       +11        Draconic       wings       7
20th +15/+10/+5 +12 +6 +12 Breath weapon (10d6; 60-ft. cone or 120-ft. line), draconic aura +5 7
Class Skills (2 + Int modifier per level, ×4 at 1st level): Climb, Craft, Intimidate, Knowledge (nature), Search (plus others 
depending on the chosen totem dragon).
620_95374_Ch1.indd   12620_95374_Ch1.indd   122/8/06   2:54:03 PM2/8/06   2:54:03 PM

13
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
 Draconic Aura (Su): You can channel the mighty powers 
of dragonkind to project an aura that grants you and nearby 
allies a special benefi t.
     Projecting an aura is a swift action (see page 4), and you can 
only project one draconic aura at a time. An aura remains in 
effect until you use a free action to dismiss it or you activate 
another aura in its place. You can have a draconic aura active 
continually; thus, an aura can be in effect at the start of an 
encounter even before you take your fi  rst  turn.
    Unless otherwise noted, your draconic aura affects all 
allies within 30 feet (including yourself ) with line of effect 
to you. Your aura is dismissed i f you become unconscious or 
are slain, but otherwise it remains in effect even if you are 
incapable of acting.
     The bonus granted by your aura begins at +1 and increases 
to +2 at 5th level, +3 at 10th level, +4 at 15th level, and +5 at 
20th level. As a 1st-level dragon shaman, you know how to 
project three auras chosen from the list below. At every odd-
numbered level after that, you learn one additional draconic 
aura of your choice, until all seven auras are known at 9th 
level. Each time you activate a draconic aura, you can choose 
from any of the auras that you know.
 Energy Shield: Any creature striking you or your ally with 
a natural attack or a nonreach melee weapon is dealt 2 points 
of energy damage for each point of your aura bonus. The 
energy type is that of your totem dragon’s damage-dealing 
breath weapon (see below).
     Power: Bonus on melee damage rolls equal to your aura bonus.
 Presence: Bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate checks 
equal to your aura bonus.
 Resistance: Resistance to your totem dragon’s energy type 
equal to 5 × your aura bonus.
    Senses: Bonus on Listen and Spot checks, as well as on 
initiative checks, equal to your aura bonus.
 Toughness: DR 1/magic for each point of your aura bonus 
(up to 5/magic at 20th level).
    Vigor: Fast healing 1 for each point of your aura bonus, but 
only affects characters at or below one-half their full normal 
hit points.
 Totem  Dragon:  You  must  choose  a  totem  dragon  from  
among the true dragons appearing in the Monster Manual (black, 
blue, brass, bronze, copper, gold, green, red, silver, or white).
     You must choose a dragon whose alignment is within one 
step of yours, as described in the following table. You gain 
additional class skills and a particular sort of breath weapon 
based on the dragon you select as your totem.
 Skill Focus: At 2nd level, you gain Skill Focus as a bonus 
feat. You must apply the feat to one of the three class skills 
granted by your chosen totem dragon. For example, a blue 
dragon shaman can select Skill Focus (Bluff ), Skill Focus 
(Hide), or Skill Focus (Spellcraft).
    At 8th level, and again at 16th level, you gain Skill Focus 
in another of the class skills granted by your chosen totem 
dragon. If you already have Skill Focus in all three of the skills 
associated with your totem dragon, you gain Skill Focus in 
any other dragon shaman class skill.
 Draconic Adaptation (Ex or Sp): At 3rd level, you take 
on an aspect of your totem dragon. Some adaptations are 
extraordinary abilities that are always active; others are spell-
like abilities that you can activate at will. Spell-like abilities 
have  a  caster  level  equal  to  your  class  level  and  a  save  DC  
equal to 10 + spell level + Cha modifi  er.
     Black—Water Breathing (Ex): You can breathe underwater 
indefinitely and can freely use spells and other abilities 
underwater (always active).
 Blue—Ventr il oquism (Sp): As the spell (at will).
 Brass—Endure Elements (Sp): As the spell, except you can 
only target yourself (at will).
 Bronze—Wa t er  B re a t h i ng  (E x) : You can breathe underwater 
indefinitely and can freely use spells and other abilities 
underwater (always active).
    Copper—Spider Climb (Sp): As the spell, except you can 
only target yourself (at will).
 Gold—Water Breathing (Ex): You can breathe underwater 
indefinitely and can freely use spells and other abilities 
underwater (always active).
 Green—Water Breathing (Ex): You can breathe underwater 
indefinitely and can freely use spells and other abilities 
underwater (always active).
 Red—Treasure Seeker (Ex): You gain a +5 competence bonus 
on Appraise and Search checks (always active).
     Silver—Feather Fall (Sp): As the spell, except you can only 
target yourself (at will).
 White—Icewalker (Ex): You can walk across icy surfaces 
without reducing your speed or making Balance checks 
(always active).
     At 13th level, you can choose as a swift action (see page 4) 
to share the effect of your draconic adaptation with any or 
al l al l ies w ithin 30 feet. In the case of spel l-l i ke abi l ities, you 
must make this decision when you activate the ability. The 
benefi t lasts until you spend a free action to rescind it or (if 
the effect has a limited duration) the effect ends, whichever 
comes fi  rst.
 Breath Weapon (Su): At 4th level, you gain a breath 
weapon corresponding to your totem dragon. Regardless of 
the area one affects or the type of energy damage it deals, all 
Totem      Acceptable            Breath      Weapon
Dragon    Alignment Class Skills Energy Type
Black NE, CE, CN     Hide, Move  Line of acid
                                Silently,                Swim
Blue NE, LE, LN Bluff, Hide,  Line of electricity
                                Spellcraft
Brass NG, CG, CN   Bluff, Gather Line of fire
                                Information,                Survival
Bronze NG, LG, LN    Disguise, Line of electricity
                                Survival,                Swim
Copper NG, CG, CN   Bluff, Hide,  Line of acid
                                Jump
Gold NG, LG, LN    Disguise, Heal,    Cone of fire
                                Swim
Green NE, LE, LN Bluff, Hide,  Cone of acid
                                Move                Silently
Red NE, CE, CN     Appraise, Bluff,    Cone of fire
                                Jump
Silver NG, LG, LN     Bluff, Disguise,    Cone of cold
                                Jump
White NE, CE, CN     Hide, Move  Cone of cold
                                Silently,                Swim
620_95374_Ch1.indd   13620_95374_Ch1.indd   132/8/06   2:54:10 PM2/8/06   2:54:10 PM

14
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
breath weapons deal 2d6 points of damage, plus an extra 1d6 
points of damage for every two additional class levels (3d6 at 
6th level, 4d6 at 8th level, and so forth). A successful Refl  ex  
save halves the damage dealt; the save DC is equal to 10 + 
1/2 your dragon shaman level + your Con modifi  er. Just like 
a true dragon, once you breathe you must wait 1d4 rounds 
before you can use your breath weapon again.
     Cone-shaped breath weapons extend out to 15 feet at 4th 
level, increasing to 30 feet at 12th level and to 60 feet at 
20th level. Line-shaped breath weapons are 30 feet long at 
4th level, increasing to 60 feet at 12th level and to 120 feet 
at 20th level.
Draconic Resolve (Ex): At 4th level, you gain immunity 
to paralysis and sleep effects. You also become immune to 
the frightful presence of dragons.
Touch of Vitality (Su): At 6th level, you can heal the 
wounds of living creatures (your own or those of others) by 
touch. Each day you can heal a number of points of damage 
equal to twice your class level × your Charisma bonus. For 
example, a 7th-level dragon shaman with a Charisma score of 
14 (+2 bonus) can heal 28 points of damage. You can choose 
to divide your healing among multiple recipients, and you 
don’t have to use it all at once. Using your touch of vitality 
is a standard action. It has no effect on undead.
    Beginning at 11th level, you can choose to spend some 
of the healing bestowed by your touch of vitality to remove 
other harmful conditions affecting the target.
    For every 5 points of your healing ability you expend, 
you can cure 1 point of ability damage or remove the dazed, 
fatigued, or sickened condition from one individual.
     For every 10 points of your healing ability you expend, you 
can remove the exhausted, nauseated, poisoned, or stunned 
condition from one individual.
     For every 20 points of your healing ability you expend, 
you can remove a negative level or the blinded, deafened, or 
diseased condition from one individual.
    You can remove a condition (or more than one condi-
tion) and heal damage with the same touch, so long as you 
expend the required number of points. For example, if you 
wanted to heal 12 points of damage and remove the bl inded 
and exhausted conditions from a target, you would have to 
expend 42 points (12 hit points restored plus 20 points for 
blinded plus 10 points for exhausted).
Natural Armor (Ex): At 7th level, your skin thickens, 
developing faint scales. Your natural armor bonus improves 
by 1. At 12th level, this improvement increases to +2, and at 
17th level to +3.
Energy Immunity (Ex): At 9th level, you gain immu-
nity to the energy type of the breath weapon you gained 
at 4th level.
Commune with Dragon Spirit (Sp): At 14th level, you 
gain the ability to contact your dragon totem directly to ask 
questions of it. This is the equivalent of casting a commune
spell, except that it has no material component, focus, or XP 
cost and allows only one question per three class levels. After 
using this ability, you cannot use it again for seven days.
Draconic Wings (Ex): At 19th level, you grow a pair of 
wings that resemble those of your totem dragon. They allow 
fl ight at a speed of 60 feet (good maneuverability). You can 
even fl  y while carrying a medium load, though your fl  y  speed  
drops to 40 feet in this case.
    If you already have wings, you can choose whether these 
draconic wings replace your own.
PLAYING A DRAGON SHAMAN
As a dragon shaman, you believe the acquisition of power is 
a worthy end in itself. By having power, you can effect your 
will in the world, be it benefi  cent or malign. Those who have 
or  seek  power  deserve  your  respect,  while  those  who  have  
power but fail to use it earn your derision.
    Your strength comes from devoting yourself to dragons, 
the primal embodiment of the principle of power, but you 
worship dragons in the abstract, honoring them much as a 
cleric might honor light as a symbol of purity and goodness. 
Dragons gather power to themselves simply by living and 
aging,  but  you  must  actively  seek  the  infl  uence  and  might  
you desire. As a dragon hungers for fl  esh to feed itself or for 
treasure to enlarge its hoard, so you hunger for power.
     You  adventure  out  of  a  desire  to  test  yourself  and  prove  
your worth; whatever the specifi c inducement, the urge to 
gain more power underlies every quest. Drawn by your power, 
others follow your lead, and you are happy to command them. 
Being  a  great  leader  is  just  one  of  the  many  ways  you  can  
manifest your power.
Religion
Dragon  shamans  can  worship  any  deity,  but  most  worship  
divine powers that encourage their worshipers to be proac-
tive in pursuit of the deity’s goals. Dragon shamans often 
worship Erythnul, Gruumsh, Heironeous, Hextor, Kord, or 
St. Cuthbert, as well as dragon deities such as Bahamut and 
Tiamat. They rarely fi nd much to admire in more passive 
or protective deities such as Boccob, Ehlonna, Fharlanghn, 
and Yondalla.
     Dragon shamans from more primitive societies sometimes 
worship true dragons. These savage dragon shamans might 
worship all true dragons, assigning each color or metallic 
hue its own place in a crude pantheon of totemic spirits. Or 
they might worship a single color or metal as the best among 
all  the  true  dragons,  fi  nding  it  the  most  representative  of  
pure power. In rare cases, a dragon shaman worships and 
serves a particular true dragon. How the dragon reacts to 
such worship depends on that individual dragon; even good 
dragons might take advantage of a dragon shaman’s worship 
to achieve their own aims.
Other Classes
You work well with melee-oriented allies such as fi ghters, 
duskblades, barbarians, rogues, and even druids. Those 
characters value the benefi  ts a dragon shaman can grant them 
and rarely make an issue of their source. Clerics, paladins, 
knights, and monks are often suspicious of your moral out-
look unless you have dedicated yourself to a kind of dragon 
that associates itself with a code of ethics similar to their own. 
Wizards, bards, and beguilers view you indifferently, whereas 
sorcerers might seek you out to learn more of the source of 

15
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
your power and your connection to dragons. Rangers might 
or might not take issue with your abilities; a ranger whose 
favored enemy is dragons might attack you on sight.
Combat
Dragon shamans lead from the front, rather than directing 
battles  from  a  safe  position  behind  others.  Keep  as  many  
allies as possible within the range of your draconic aura, but 
focus on those in melee with your foes. Pick a draconic aura 
that grants your allies the best benefi  t for the situation, and 
don’t hesitate to sw itch it dur ing the fi  ght  should  conditions  
change and another aura prove more useful. Outside combat, 
employ the senses or presence aspects of your draconic aura. 
If you have a cleric or other healer in your group, save your 
touch of vitality for removing conditions or for emergency 
healing. If no other healer is present, use it to heal yourself 
and your allies after combat.
Advancement
You  profi  t  most  from  remaining  a  dragon  shaman  
throughout your advancement, so that your 
breath weapon and draconic aura continue 
to improve as you gain levels. If you do 
multiclass, a level of barbarian is an ex-
cellent choice; the benefi  ts  it  grants  
help  you  in  combat  regardless  of  
when you take that 1st level. Al-
ternatively,  you  might  consider  
beginning your career as a 1st-
level  barbarian  for  the  greater  
hit points and skill points that 
option offers, then multiclass-
ing  into  the  dragon  shaman  
class at 2nd level. The fi  ghter  
class might seem like a strong 
second choice, but unless you 
need a fi ghter bonus feat for a 
particular kind of character, 
you’ll  see  better  long-term  ad-
vantages from the barbarian 
class. The bard class can be an 
interesting multiclass option, 
since  the  benefits  provided  
by  bardic  music  stack  with  
those provided by your dra-
conic aura.
STARTING 
PACK AGE S
Package 1: The Defender
Dwarf Dragon Shaman (Gold)
    Ability    Scores:    Str 14, Dex 12, 
Con 15, Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Heal.
    Feat:  Shield  Specialization  
(heavy)*.
     Weap o ns :     Morningstar (1d8), five 
javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale  mail  (+4  AC),  heavy  wooden  shield  (+3  AC  
[includes Shield Specialization]).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 15 gp.
Package 2: The Destroyer
Half-Orc Dragon Shaman (Red)
     Ability     Scores:     Str 16, Dex 12, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Intimidate.
     Feat: Power Attack.
     Weap o ns :     Morningstar (1d8), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 10 gp.
Package 3: The Second-Rank Warrior
Human Dragon Shaman (Copper)
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Hide, Jump.
     Feat:     Combat Refl  exes, Power Attack.
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d8/×3), light crossbow with 20 bolts 
(1d6/×3, 60 f t.).
Thane and Iskara, dragon shamans
Illus. by L. Parillo
620_95374_Ch1.indd   15620_95374_Ch1.indd   152/8/06   2:54:24 PM2/8/06   2:54:24 PM

16
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 8 gp.
DRAGON SHAMANS IN THE WORLD
“There are differences from one to another, based on the dragon each 
shaman honors, but the main thing to remember is this: The whole 
lot of them are mad for power.”
—Durven Ironscale, a dwarf sorcerer 
instructing the young of the Ironscale clan
Dragon shamans put the power and appeal of dragons in 
players’ hands while providing DMs with a new way to put 
dragons in the D&D game. The class provides an uncom-
plicated way to have a new play experience, and each NPC 
dragon shaman could provide the nucleus for an interesting 
cult or villainous organization the PCs must face.
Daily Life
A dragon shaman remains ever ready to face the challenges 
of a new day. Without the need to rest, study, or pray for 
their powers, dragon shamans can leap up in pursuit of 
power whenever they desire. This capability causes most 
dragon shamans to be decisive and swift to act. Chaotic 
dragon shamans are often impetuous and energetic, while 
lawful dragon shamans tend to be more ready to improvise 
and less rigid in their thinking than some might expect. 
Dragon shamans desire power and constantly seek the 
means to gain it. To dragon shamans, life and adventure 
are one and the same.
    Dragon shamans often possess the charisma and take-
charge attitude required of great leaders, but many suffer 
from an inability to empathize with those they lead. Dragon 
shamans respect the pursuit of might and its use, and they 
often minimize the value of those who adhere to other 
philosophies. Even among themselves, dragon shamans tend 
to be contentious, and a single dragon shaman rarely takes 
a leadership role over a group of his fellows for any length 
of time. Although dragon shamans give great respect to one 
another, each is always trying to outdo the others in all pur-
suits. The most power ful dragon shaman leaders ar ise among 
savage tribes that worship dragons, where a single dragon 
shaman relies on his forceful personality and impressive 
powers to win the hearts of comrades.
Notables
The pursuit of power garners notoriety for a dragon shaman, 
but it also can bring about his death or force him into exile. 
A powerful dragon shaman warlord might suddenly arise 
and terrorize an area for a time, only to fall from power as 
swiftly as he appeared. A case in point would be the history 
of a barbaric human named Kalia. Under her leadership, her 
tribe of red dragon worshipers raided and razed hundreds 
of elf and human towns on the border between two nations. 
Then she vanished, and soon afterward her leaderless tribe 
was caught in an ambush and exterminated. Some say she 
died in a squabble with a fellow dragon shaman, but other 
believe she left her tribe to directly serve a red dragon wyrm 
that laired in distant mountains.
Organizations
Dragon shamans rarely work together for long unless they 
are led by a dragon of the type to which all the shamans 
present have dedicated themselves. In such cases, the dragon 
is either worshiped or leads because the dragon shamans 
see it as the embodiment of all they seek; thus, obeying the 
dragon’s edicts presents the swiftest path to that desired 
goal. Rank and privilege rarely have much meaning in such 
groups. Instead, the dragon decides each shaman’s duties 
according to his or her merit, changing such assignments as 
necessary. Such a group exists among the Ironscale clan. Tied 
to a long-dead silver dragon by blood, the dwarf clan fosters 
sorcerers and is led by a half-dragon. Despite these fi  rm ties to 
dragonkind, the clan views its dragon shaman members with 
some suspicion, since they follow the orders of an unrelated 
silver dragon that lairs near the clan home.
NPC Reactions
Dragon shamans who don’t show aspects of their affi  liation  
with dragons rarely elicit an unusual reaction from others. 
To most they seem like simple warriors or perhaps barbar-
ians. Those who know of their pursuit of draconic power or 
who see evidence of it, such as scales or a dragon shaman’s 
breath weapon, react depending on their attitude toward the 
dragon shaman’s totem dragon. This reaction is one step closer 
to hostile if the dragon is of a kind feared or hated by that 
individual. The reaction is one step closer to friendly if that 
individual is directly associated with a dragon of that kind. 
Clerics, paladins, and others who are deeply entrenched in a 
particular moral outlook view the dragon shaman’s devotion 
with suspicion, and their reaction is one step closer to hostile 
regardless of the dragon shaman’s totem dragon.
DR AGON SHAMAN LORE
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana) can research 
dragon shamans to learn more about them. When a character 
makes a skill check, read or paraphrase the following, includ-
ing the information from lower DCs.
 DC 10: Dragon shamans devote themselves to dragons and 
aspire to their power.
 DC 15: A dragon shaman devotes himself to a particular 
kind of true dragon and gains powers based on the dragon 
chosen. He can use the dragon’s breath weapon and grow 
dragonlike scales. Very powerful dragon shamans can grow 
dragon wings and fl  y.
 DC 20: In addition to the detai ls above, this result al lows 
the PC to know that a dragon shaman projects an aura that 
can bolster himself and his allies in a number of ways and 
can heal damage or remove negative conditions somewhat 
like a paladin.
DRAGON SHAMANS IN THE GAME
Dragon shamans fi  t easily into any ongoing campaign because 
true dragons are a cornerstone of nearly every DUNGEON & 
DRAGONS game. The PCs might first learn of dragon shamans 
by encountering a cult of dragon worshipers near a dragon’s 
lair. Alternatively, a more civilized group of dragon shamans 
might serve a dragon who rules a city. A lone dragon shaman 
Illus. by L. Parillo
620_95374_Ch1.indd   16620_95374_Ch1.indd   162/8/06   2:54:35 PM2/8/06   2:54:35 PM

Adventurers face off 
against a black dragon
620_95374_Ch1.indd   17620_95374_Ch1.indd   172/8/06   2:54:44 PM2/8/06   2:54:44 PM

18
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
makes an excellent new villain, a powerful temporary ally, or 
an eager participant in an ongoing plot because his focused 
pursuit of power can get him involved in anyone’s scheme 
to gain it.
    Dragon shaman PCs should present no more diffi culty 
than introducing a monk or cleric of a lesser-known deity. 
Although the character’s abilities might be somewhat foreign, 
the idea that an individual is so dedicated to one philosophy 
that it grants him powers should be easily understood. The 
player of a dragon shaman usually finds the character’s 
association with dragons to be the most entertaining part of 
the class. Before featuring adventures that deal with dragons, 
ask that player about her character’s philosophy concerning 
dragons. Does the character admire dragons in the abstract, 
worship them as living gods, or hold to a philosophy between 
these extremes? The answer should inform your adventure 
planning  and  inspire  new  adventure  ideas.  Be  careful  
about using the PC’s dedication to dragons to manipulate 
the character’s actions: Occasional use of this idea might 
provoke some interesting roleplaying, but the player won’t 
enjoy your game if a dragon shows up every session to boss 
her PC around.
Adaptation
You can alter the dragon shaman to suit your game in a number 
of ways. You could decide that all dragon shamans are barbaric, 
or that all them are civilized and sophisticated disciples of 
dragons who prefer to work behind the scenes through such 
agents. You might decide that only good dragons are available 
to your players for their totem dragons, or that a particular 
organization fosters dragon shamans devoted to a single kind 
of dragon. If you feature other dragons prominently in your 
game, such as the gem dragons from Monster Manual II or the 
deep dragon and the shadow dragon from Monsters of Faerûn, 
you might consider changing the class’s features to allow a 
dragon shaman to follow other kinds of dragons as well.
Sample Encounter
Dragon shamans make excellent villains and tricky allies. As 
a villain, a dragon shaman dedicated to an evil dragon can 
be paired with a cult of followers, half-dragons, and dragons 
of all ages to make for exciting themed encounters. As an 
ally, a dragon shaman’s blind pursuit of power could create 
interesting friction with the PCs and turn an ally into an 
enemy. A dragon shaman might become embroiled in the 
PCs’ pursuits i f they come into possession of an item of great 
power, if both the PCs and dragon shaman seek the same 
source of power, or i f the dragon shaman’s at tempts to gather 
power endanger the PCs or those they care about.
 EL 7: Thane has admired blue dragons ever since he wit-
nessed a blue dragon’s at tack on his cit y when he was a chi ld. 
The  power  of  the  dragon  and  the  futility  of  the  defenders’  
efforts against it frightened him, but he also found the spec-
tacle strangely thrilling. When he was older, Thane learned all 
he could about blue dragons. With each new bit of knowledge, 
his respect for them grew. In his search for information he 
met a dragon shaman, and that encounter changed his life. 
Now a dragon shaman himself, Thane seeks ever greater 
power and hopes one day to have enough to challenge the 
dragon that laid waste to his childhood home and prove 
himself the stronger of the two. Thane seems single-minded 
and focused. He always has a mental list of goals he wants 
to  achieve  in  any  situation  and  doggedly  pursues  them.  
Although outwardly calm and cold, he explodes into action 
in an instant when thwarted.
Thane                                                             CR                                                             7
Male human blue dragon shaman 7
LN Medium humanoid
Init +1
Senses Listen +2, Spot +2
Aura draconic aura* +2
 *Class feature described on page 13
Languages Common, Draconic
AC 21, touch 11, flat-footed 20
 (+1 Dex, +6 armor, +3 shield)
hp 57 (7 HD)
Immune paralysis, sleep, frightful presence (dragons)
Fort +8, Ref +6, Will +6
Speed 20 ft. (4 squares)
Melee +1 mornings tar +9 (1d8+3)
Ranged +1 light crossbow +7 (1d8+1/19–20)
Base Atk +5; Grp +7
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
EX-DRAGON SHAMANS
Dragon shamans who change alignment could lose their powers. 
If a dragon shaman changes to an alignment still appropriate 
to the dragon to which he is already dedicated, nothing hap-
pens. However, if the dragon shaman changes to an alignment 
inappropriate for his chosen dragon, he immediately loses all 
abilities granted by the dragon shaman class and becomes an 
ex-dragon shaman.
    An ex-dragon shaman can choose a new color or metallic hue 
of true dragon to emulate and thus regain the powers granted 
by the class. To switch to a new totem dragon, he must find a 
dragon shaman of higher level who is dedicated to that dragon 
type. The higher-level dragon shaman must willingly expend 
all her touch of vitality on the ex-dragon shaman each day for 
a week. At the end of the week, the ex-dragon shaman gains 
the class features of a dragon shaman dedicated to the newly 
chosen totem dragon, including exchanging the focus of any 
class-granted Skill Focus feats. Most dragon shamans who are 
asked to perform this service demand payment in the form 
of some great deed. This deed might be a demand that the 
ex-dragon  shaman  retrieve  magic  items  that  will  add  to  his  
sponsor’s power or simply a short quest to prove the ex-dragon 
shaman’s worth.
    Dragon shamans can go through the same process to switch 
chosen totem dragons even if they don’t change alignment. If 
a dragon shaman has an alignment appropriate for a different 
true dragon color or hue, the shaman can switch to that kind of 
dragon through a process identical to the one described above 
for ex-dragon shamans.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   18620_95374_Ch1.indd   182/8/06   2:54:54 PM2/8/06   2:54:54 PM

19
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
Special Actions breath weapon
Abilities Str 15, Dex 12, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 14
SQ touch of vitality (28 points)
Draconic Auras Known Energy Shield, Power, Presence, 
Resistance, Senses, Vigor
Spell-Like Abilities (CL 7th):
     At     will—ventriloquism (DC 13).
Feats Ability Focus (breath weapon), Alertness, Lightning 
Reflexes, Skill Focus (Bluff )
B
, Weapon Focus 
(morningstar)
Skills Bluff +10, Climb +1, Diplomacy +4, Disguise +2 (+4 
acting), Intimidate +9, Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen 
+2, Speak Language +0, Spot +2, Survival +0 (+2 in 
aboveground natural environments)
Possessions +1 breastplate, +1 heavy wooden shield, +1 
morningstar, +1 light crossbow, cloak of resistance +1, 37 gp
Breath Weapon (Su) 30-ft. line, once every 1d4 rounds, 3d6 
electricity, Reflex DC 17 half
DUSKBLADE
 “My blade and my magic are one and the same.”
—Yele, elf duskblade
The  duskblade  blurs  the  line  between  spellcaster  and  
warrior, marrying the power of magic with hand-to-hand 
combat prowess.
    A student of ancient elven spellcasting techniques, the 
duskblade combines arcane spellcasting with the combat 
skills of a fi  ghter. While the ability to cast arcane spells in 
armor originated with the elves, over the millennia the secrets 
of the duskblade have been disseminated to the other races, 
and today members of any race can become a duskblade.
    If you find you can’t choose between being an arcane 
spellcaster who zaps your enemies with powerful spells and 
a nimble, powerful front-line melee character who lays them 
low with a sword, the duskblade is the perfect class for you. 
Combining arcane magic with melee prowess, you’re prepared 
in any situation. Enemies who underestimate you never get 
a second chance, since you don’t even have to switch back 
and  forth  between  hands-on  combat  and  spellcasting;  you  
can do both simultaneously.
MAKING A DUSKBLADE
The duskblade is a quintessential hybrid character, simultane-
ously a potent spellcaster and an effective melee combatant.
     The original duskblades were elite guardians in an ancient 
elf empire, duelmasters and arcane spellcasters beyond 
compare. Historical accounts vary on why they were called 
duskblades; some say the name is symbolic of how they 
combined swordplay and arcane magic—a night-and-day 
combination. Others contend that the duskblades earned 
their name when they were charged with preserving the elf 
race in the face of a tide of darkness and evil.
     The most powerful duskblades can duel a fi  ghter to a stand-
still and match a wizard spell for spell—for a while, at least. 
But the class really comes into its own when you embrace your 
hybrid nature, using a quick-cast spell to supplement your 
melee attacks or combining a touch spell with a devastating 
sword strike.
     The duskblade is a good choice for players who know they 
want  a  sword-wielding  arcane  spellcaster  from  the  begin-
ning.  By  contrast,  multiclass  fi  ghter/wizard  combinations  
and  prestige  classes  such  as  the  eldritch  knight  are  better  
suited for characters who begin their careers as fi  ghters  or  
arcane  spellcasters  and  only  later  contemplate  embracing  
their opposite.
     Abilities:     Your Intelligence and Strength scores should be 
as high as possible, since your spellcasting and melee combat 
depend  upon  them.  Your  Constitution  is  also  important,  
because you need all the hit points you can get.
 Races: The duskblade class originated among the ancient 
elves, and to this day most duskblades are elves. However, 
some humans and half-elves also have proved adept at 
mastering the class’s dual focus on combat and spellcast-
ing. Halfl  ings, gnomes, dwarves, and half-orcs rarely enter 
this class.
 Alignment: Since the duskblade class originated among 
the elves, those who undergo the intense training required to 
master the class abilities at the hands of an elf mentor often 
end their apprenticeship sharing the chaotic good alignment 
of most elves. However, duskblades are highly individualist 
and can be of any alignment.
 Starting Gold: 6d4×10 gp (150 gp).
     Starting     Age:     As wizard (PH 109).
CLASS FEATURES
Your  class  features  are  simple  to  characterize:  constant  
improvement  in  your  spellcasting,  a  fi  ghter’s  base  attack  
bonus  progression,  and  ever-increasing  mastery  of  arcane  
magic in melee combat.
     Weapon  and  Armor  Profi  ciency: Duskblades are pro-
fi cient with all martial weapons, as well as all armors and 
shields (except tower shields).
     Spells: You cast arcane spells, which are drawn from the 
duskblade spell list on page 98. You can cast any spell you 
know without preparing it ahead of time.
     To lear n or cast a spel l, you must have an Intel l igence score 
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Int 10 for 0-level spells, 
Int 11 for 1st-level spells, and so forth). The Diffi  culty  Class  
for a saving throw against your spell is 10 + the spell level + 
your Int modifi  er.
    You can cast only a certain number of spells of each spell 
level per day. Your base daily spell allotment is given on Table 
1–3. In addition, you receive bonus spells per day if you have 
a  high  Intelligence  score  (see  Table  1–1:  Ability  Modifi  ers  
and Bonus Spells, page 8 of the Player’s Handbook.)
     Spells     Known: You begin play knowing two 0-level spells 
and two 1st-level spells, chosen from the duskblade spell list. 
You also know one additional 0-level spell for each point of 
Intelligence bonus.
     Each  time  you  gain  a  new  class  level,  you  learn  one  
additional  spell  of  any  level  you  can  cast,  chosen  from  the  
duskblade spell list.
     Upon  reaching  5th  level,  and  at  every  subsequent  odd-
numbered level, you can choose to learn a new spell in place 
of one you already know. In effect, you lose access to the old 
spell in exchange for gaining the new one. The new spell’s 
620_95374_Ch1.indd   19620_95374_Ch1.indd   192/8/06   2:55:01 PM2/8/06   2:55:01 PM

20
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
level must be the same as that of the spell being exchanged, 
and it must be at least two levels lower than the highest-level 
spell you can cast. For instance, upon reaching 9th level, you 
could  trade  in  a  single  1st-level  spell  (two  levels  below  the  
highest-level spell you can cast, which is 3rd) for a different 
1st-level spell. You can swap only a single spell at any given 
level and must choose whether or not to swap the spell at the 
same time that you gain new spells known for the level.
    You need not prepare spells in advance. You can cast any 
spell you know at any time, assuming you have not yet used 
up your spells per day for that spell level.
    Arcane Attunement (Sp): You can use the spell-like 
powers dancing lights, detect magic, fl are, ghost sound, and read 
magic a combined total of times per day equal to 3 + your Int 
modifi  er. These spell-like powers do not count against your 
total of spells known or spells per day.
     Armored Mage (Ex): Normally, armor of any type inter-
feres with an arcane spellcaster’s gestures, which can cause 
spells to fail if those spells have a somatic component. A 
duskblade’s limited focus and specialized training, however, 
allows you to avoid arcane spell failure so long as you stick 
to light armor and light shields. This training does not 
extend to medium or heavy armors, nor to heavy shields. 
This ability does not apply to spells gained from a different 
spellcasting class.
     At 4th level, you learn to use medium armor with no chance 
of arcane spell failure.
     At 7th level, you learn to use a heavy shield with no chance 
of arcane spell failure.
    Combat    Casting:    At 2nd level, you gain Combat Casting 
as a bonus feat.
Arcane  Channeling  (Su):
Beginning at 3rd level, you can 
use a standard 
action to cast 
any touch spell you know and deliver the spell through your 
weapon with a melee attack. Casting a spell in this manner 
does  not  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity.  The  spell  must  
have a casting time of 1 standard action or less. If the melee 
attack is successful, the attack deals damage normally; then 
the effect of the spell is resolved.
     At  13th  level,  you  can  cast  any  touch  spell  you  know  as  
part of a full attack action, and the spell affects each target 
you hit in melee combat that round. Doing so discharges the 
spell at the end of the round, in the case of a touch spell that 
would otherwise last longer than 1 round.
    Quick    Cast: Beginning at 5th level, you can cast one spell 
each day as a swift action, so long as the casting time of the 
spell is 1 standard action or less.
     You can use this ability twice per day at 10th level, three 
times per day at 15th level, and four times per day at 20th 
level.
     Spell  Power  (Ex):  Starting  at  6th  level,  you  can  more  
easily overcome the spell resistance of any opponent you 
successfully  injure  
with  a  melee  attack.  
If  you  have  injured  
an opponent with a 
melee attack, you gain 
a  +2  bonus  on  your  
caster  level  check  to  
overcome  spell  resis-
tance for the remainder 
of  the  encounter.  This  
bonus increases to +3 at 
11th level, to +4 at 16th 
level, and to +5 
at 18th level.
Yele and Hallia, duskblades
Illus. by D. Hudnut
620_95374_Ch1.indd   20620_95374_Ch1.indd   202/8/06   2:55:08 PM2/8/06   2:55:08 PM

21
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
PLAYING A DUSKBLADE
A duskblade can take the fi ghter’s place in the front ranks 
of a party or ensorcel his foes from a distance like a wizard. 
While you aren’t quite as good as either a dedicated fi  ghter  or  
a dedicated wizard or sorcerer in those roles, you’re reasonably 
effective in either, and you can change roles on a round-by-
round basis as needed.
     Choosing the path of the duskblade means you don’t have to 
choose between being a combat specialist and a spellcaster. You 
enjoy the best of both worlds, and you’ll undertake any quest 
that promises to improve either your spel lcasting or your melee 
prowess. Driven to simultaneously master both swordplay 
and spellcasting, you might devote yourself to delving into 
ancient ruins to learn more about the original duskblades or 
wander far and wide looking for other duskblades interested 
in restoring the class to its previous glory. 
Religion
The  demands  of  martial  and  arcane  discipline  don’t  leave  
much room for religion in the typical duskblade. Good-
aligned  duskblades  typically  venerate  Corellon  Larethian,  
even if they aren’t elves, because he supposedly taught the 
fi  rst duskblades the secret of combining melee combat with 
arcane casting. A few worship Boccob as the personifi cation 
of their own mastery of magic, while more honor Wee Jas, 
who  exemplifi es both the magic they wield and also the 
death that they deal.
Other Classes
You get along well with members of other classes who share a 
rigorous devotion to a chosen path, such as paladins, dragon 
shamans, and monks. You are the object of envy to sorcerers 
and of admiration to bards, who sometimes try to emulate 
your abilities (often with disastrous results). Among members 
of the two classes whose portfolios you draw from, fi  ghters  
and wizards, some view you with disdain while others are 
fascinated by your unique meld of melee combat and arcane 
spellcasting. Barbarians, clerics, and knights tend to distrust 
you, while rogues, rangers, druids, and beguilers view you 
and other duskblades with indifference.
Combat
You might sometimes feel you have too many options, too 
many things you can do in a single round. Use that fl  exibility  
to con fou nd your enemies, out fi  ghting what you can’t outspell 
and  outspelling  what  you  can’t  outfi  ght.  The  monster  that  
engages you in melee, hoping to get an at tack of oppor t unit y 
that spoils your next spell, is in for a surprise—a surprise 
consisting of three feet of razor-sharp steel.
     Most of a duskblade’s spel ls target a single creat ure or have 
a range of touch, so you are most effective when you single 
Table 1–3: The Duskblade   Hit Die: d8
             Base
 Attack  Fort     Ref     Will      ————Spells per Day———— 
Level     Bonus   Save   Save   Save    Special   0   1st     2nd     3rd     4th     5th
  1st +1 +2 +0 +2 Arcane attunement,       3         2        —       —       —       —
                                                          armored           mage           (light)
  2nd     +2 +3 +0 +3 Combat Casting 4 3 — — — —
  3rd +3 +3 +1 +3 Arcane channeling 5 4 — — — —
  4th +4 +4 +1 +4 Armored mage (medium) 6 5 — — — —
  5th +5 +4 +1 +4 Quick cast 1/day 6 5 2 — — —
  6th +6/+1 +5 +2 +5 Spell power +2 6 6 3 — — —
  7th +7/+2 +5 +2 +5 Armored mage (heavy shield) 6 6 5 — — —
  8th +8/+3 +6 +2 +6  6 7 6 — — —
                  9th         +9/+4         +6         +3         +6                  6         7         6         2         —         —
10th         +10/+5         +7         +3         +7         Quick         cast         2/day         6         8         7         3         —         —
11th         +11/+6/+1         +7         +3         +7         Spell         power         +3         6         8         7         5         —         —
12th         +12/+7/+2         +8         +4         +8                  6         8         8         6         —         —
13th         +13/+8/+3         +8         +4         +8         Arcane         channeling         (full         attack)         6         9         8         6         2         —
14th         +14/+9/+4         +9         +4         +9                  6         9         8         7         3         —
15th         +15/+10/+5         +9         +5         +9         Quick         cast         3/day         6         9         8         7         5         —
16th         +16/+11/+6/+1         +10         +5         +10         Spell         power         +4         6         9         9         8         6         —
17th         +17/+12/+7/+2         +10         +5         +10                  6         10         9         8         6         2
18th         +18/+13/+8/+3         +11         +6         +11         Spell         power         +5         6         10         9         8         7         3
19th       +19/+14/+9/+4       +11      +6      +11            6        10       10        9         7         5
20th      +20/+15/+10/+5      +12      +6      +12      Quick      cast      4/day      6        10       10       10        8         6
Class Skills (2 + Int modifier per level, ×4 at 1st level): Climb, Concentration, Craft, Decipher Script, Jump, Knowledge (all 
skills taken individually), Ride, Sense Motive, Spellcraft, Swim.
pqs
NEW ARMOR SPECIAL ABILITY: 
TWILIGHT
This armor special ability, which first appeared in the Book of 
Exalted Deeds supplement, is of particular use to duskblades. 
Such armor becomes translucent when donned and possesses 
a faint sunset-colored sheen. Twilight armor reduces the chance 
of arcane spell failure by 10%.
    Faint abjuration; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor; Price 
+1 bonus.
pqs
620_95374_Ch1.indd   21620_95374_Ch1.indd   212/8/06   2:55:18 PM2/8/06   2:55:18 PM

22
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
out and focus upon defeating a single opponent. Your spells 
that affect areas are limited mostly to cones, which means 
you need to be on or near the front lines to get the greatest 
effect from them. Even if you come close to being as effective 
as a fi  ghter or a sorcerer in his chosen fi  eld,  you’re  certainly  
not as effective as a fi  ghter  and a sorcerer. You’ll occasionally 
cast a spell and strike with your blade in the same round, but 
pure spel lcasters such as the sorcerer are more able to a f fect a 
crowd of foes or blast a group of opponents. That said, actions 
are the D&D game’s most fundamental currency, and you’ll 
be able to take advantage of additional actions in the round, as 
you combine spellcasting with melee attacks and eventually 
gain the ability to cast any spell you know as a swift action 
a number of times per day.
Advancement
Like the sorcerer, you face a crucial decision: which spells to 
put on your spells known list. The offensive spells on your 
spell  list  fall  into  three  primary  categories:  touch  spells,  
single-target ranged spells, and short-range cones. Choose at 
least one touch spell, such as shocking grasp, to take advantage 
of your arcane channeling ability. You should also take a 
movement spel l, such as swift expeditious retreat, and an attack-
enhancing spell such as true strike or magic weapon. Future 
spell selections can tailor your repertoire to the role you fi  nd  
yourself  most  commonly  fi lling, whether it be a front-line 
fi  ghter or a fi  nesse  caster.
    Assign as many skill points as possible to Concentration, 
Knowledge (arcana), and Sense Motive. For feats, take the 
Weapon Focus (longsword) feat and also consider sudden 
metamagic feats, such as Sudden Silent and Sudden Empower, 
both from the Complete Arcane supplement.
     Do not neglect to put some thought into your gear as well. 
Spend 30% of your wealth on the heaviest armor you can 
manage without risking arcane spell failure chance (often 
mithral and/or having the twilight special ability). Spend 
20% on your primary weapon and 20% on items that improve 
your Intelligence, Strength, and saving throws. Spend 20% on 
wands and scrolls and the remaining 10% on miscellaneous 
items and a basic adventuring package.
     Your spellcasting and fi  ghting prowess also allow you the 
opportunity to enter into prestige classes that are suited to 
either melee or spellcasting.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Blaster
Human Duskblade
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb,    Concentration,  Jump,  Knowledge  (arcana),  
Spellcraft.
 Languages: Common, Draconic, Elven.
     Feat: Point Blank Shot, Weapon Focus (ranged spell).
     Weap o n:     Greataxe (1d12/×3), 3 javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 10 gp.
 Spells Known: 1st—Kelgore’s fire bolt, ray of enfeeblement; 
0—acid splash, disrupt undead, ray of frost, touch of fatigue.
Package 2: The Defender
Dwarf Duskblade
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 6.
     Skills:     Concentration, Decipher Script, Knowledge (arcana), 
Spellcraft.
 Languages: Common, Dwarven, Goblin, Orc.
     Feat: Toug h nes s .
     Weap o n:     Dwarven waraxe (1d10/×3).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), light wooden shield (+1 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 22 gp.
 Spells Known: 1st—lesser defl  ect, resist energy; 0—acid splash, 
disrupt undead, ray of frost, touch of fatigue.
Package 3: The Skirmisher
Elf Duskblade
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb, Concentration, Jump, Spellcraft, Spot (cc).
 Languages: Common, Draconic, Elven, Sylvan.
     Feat:     Dodge.
     Weap o ns :     Glaive (1d10/×3), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 42 gp.
 Spells Known: 1st—swift expeditious retreat, true strike; 0—acid 
splash, disrupt undead, ray of frost, touch of fatigue.
DUSKBLADES IN THE WORLD
“Your spells cannot penetrate my magical defenses. You are help-
less, wizard!”
—Last words of Zufi  r Halaq, rakshasa lord
The duskblade combines the best features of the fi  ghter  and  
wizard. Duskblades make dangerous foes because they have 
so many options, magical and martial, available to them every 
round; their ability to deliver touch spells through a melee 
attack is particularly potent.
Daily Life
The life of a duskblade is one of constant training. Each 
duskblade must simultaneously be a swordmaster, a deft 
spellcaster,  and  an  expert  in  the  esoteric  techniques  of  
arcane channeling. Each of those elements requires years 
to master; put them together, and you have a training regi-
men that only the most driven characters can maintain. 
The typical duskblade is doing calisthenics in the castle 
courtyard before the other characters wake up in the morn-
ing and practicing somatic gestures long after everyone 
else  has  gone  to  sleep  in  the  evening.  Exceptions  exist,  
of course, but in general duskblades have a reputation as 
driven, focused individuals.
Notables
Since duskblades are few and far between, they are natural 
loners, wandering far and wide in search of adventures that 
will prove a suitable challenge for their unique combination 
of abilities. Such is the case with Gwilor the Swift, a wild elf 
who adventured in the woodlands of his people for a century 
620_95374_Ch1.indd   22620_95374_Ch1.indd   222/8/06   2:55:25 PM2/8/06   2:55:25 PM

23
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
or so before he committed himself entirely to a crusade 
against the duergar and spent the rest of his long career on 
extended forays into the underground.
    Other duskblades join like-minded adventuring groups. 
Given  their  own  mix  of  melee  and  spellcasting  abilities,  
duskblades are willing to try unusual combinations, such 
as in the case of Taiglin the Fair, a gray elf duskblade who 
formed a highly successful party with a human hexblade and 
a halfl  ing  warmage.
    Still others are restless, moving from group to group and 
area to area in search of new chal lenges. For example, Hal lia 
Yelebane, a self-taught half-elf duskblade, rarely stays in the 
same country more than a month or two. She arrives, seeks 
out a suitable challenge for her talents, throws herself into 
that adventure, and then moves on. In the course of her 
career (brief by elven standards), she has rescued a halfl  ing  
metropolis from a cabal of mind fl  ayers who were “farming” 
the small humanoids for their brains, teamed with a githzerai 
monk to defeat a famed githyanki knight (and claimed his 
silver sword as her own), and exposed malenti infi  ltrators  in  
an aquatic elf community and thus turned back a sahuagin 
invasion, along with other exploits. Hallia’s nickname derives 
from her unexpected victory, early in her career, over one of 
her fellow duskblades, the elf Yele, who until then had boasted 
that he had never been defeated in a one-on-one duel. The 
two became fast friends and now make a point to duel at least 
once every year.
Organizations
Because of the elven heritage of the class, many duskblades 
gravitate  toward  the  elf  lands  even  if  they  aren’t  elves  
themselves. Knowledge of duskblade fighting techniques 
is sufficiently rare that no large company of duskblades 
exists—or, if one does, it’s a well-kept secret. For centuries, 
the class has been sustained by nothing more than solitary 
masters who teach duskblade skills and spells to worthy 
apprentices, and by those who have taught themselves the 
techniques from long-neglected tomes and training manuals. 
More recently, some self-taught duskblades have appeared 
who master the diffi  cult techniques required by the class 
through some innate instinct. No matter what their origin, 
all are equals in the eyes of their fellow duskblades.
     Duskblades love to test themselves against each other; on 
the rare occasions when the paths of two duskblade adventur-
ers happen to cross, they w i l l always ma ke time for a fr iendly 
duel before they part. Given elf life spans, some duskblades 
maintain friendly rivalries that can last for centuries.
NPC Reactions
Few common folk understand who or what duskblades truly 
are, and most assume those duskblades they happen to meet 
are simply fi  ghters with a bit of sorcerer ability (or vice versa). 
Legends speak of elf heroes skilled with both blade and spell, 
but these tales do little to inform anyone of the specifi  c  abili-
ties of the duskblades. Most adventurers react to duskblades 
with  some  wariness  because  a  duskblade’s  combination  of  
abilities makes it very hard to judge how powerful or capable 
such a character is in any situation.
DUSKBLADE LORE
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana) can research 
duskblades to learn more about them. When a character 
makes a skill check, read or paraphrase the following, includ-
ing the information from lower DCs.
    DC    10: Some elves have the ability to cast arcane spells 
while engaged in melee combat; such elves are known as 
duskblades.
     DC     15: Not all duskblades are elves; sometimes members of 
other races master the class’s special techniques of spellcast-
ing in melee.
     DC     20: Duskblades preserve an ancient tradition that enables 
them to deliver spell damage through weapon strikes.
DUSKBLADES IN THE GAME
Duskblades fi  t easily into an ongoing game because of their 
small numbers and enigmatic mix of abilities. The presence 
of the class is easily explained as your players explore more of 
the world—they simply hadn’t encountered any duskblades 
until now, or had mistaken those they did encounter for 
multiclass fi  ghter/wizards. Now that they’ve discovered this 
aspect of the setting, however, they’re free to multiclass into 
the duskblade class or to begin a new character with levels 
only in the new class.
Adaptations
One of the more interesting ways to adapt this class to your 
campaign is to keep the class abilities more or less the same 
but to change the race involved. For example, the githyanki 
have  a  tradition  of  multiclass  fighter/wizards  known  as  
gish; these individuals could easily be reconceived as a gith 
duskblade class. Unexpected combinations would be the most 
striking, such as a previously unrevealed halfl  ing  duskblade  
class. After all, few expect halfl  ings to engage in melee except 
when making sneak attacks, but when magically boosted 
by bull’s strength and the like and fighting with oversized 
weapons, they could prove unexpectedly deadly against those 
who underestimate them—which, after all, is the essence of 
the duskblade class.
Sample Encounter
An encounter with a duskblade should highlight his com-
bined use of spells and melee abilities. The duskblade should 
use his spells to force the PCs to close into melee with him, 
and then he should batter them with a barrage of touch spells 
delivered through his melee attacks. Fighting a villainous 
duskblade should be tricky, because he’ll use the tools that 
are most effective against each character (for example, spells 
requiring Refl  ex saves against the fi  ghter and powerful melee 
attacks against the wizard).
 EL 7: Yele has always been drawn to both physical combat 
and the study of magic. As a duskblade, he combines the two 
into one seamless fi  ghting st yle. A n advent urer by trade, Yele 
could encounter the characters as a friend or a foe. If as a foe, 
it is because some enemy of the adventurers has encouraged 
Yele to go after them for some reason, perhaps to gain some 
magical treasure currently in their possession that would 
signifi cantly boost either his swordplay or his spellcasting. 
620_95374_Ch1.indd   23620_95374_Ch1.indd   232/8/06   2:55:32 PM2/8/06   2:55:32 PM

24
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
If as a friend, Yele could join with the adventurers to search 
for some lost piece of arcane lore or because their quest 
strikes him as likely to prove an interesting challenge for 
his talents.
Yele                                                                 CR                                                                 7
Male elf duskblade 7
NG Medium humanoid
Init +6
Senses low-light vision; Listen +2, Spot +2
Languages Common, Elven, Gnoll, Sylvan
AC 21, touch 13, flat-footed 19
hp 35 (7 HD)
Immune sleep
Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +6 (+8 against enchantments)
Speed 20 ft. (4 squares)
Melee +1 longsword +11/+6 (1d8+4/19–20)
Base Atk +7; Grp +10
Atk Options arcane channeling*, quick cast*
Abilities Str 16, Dex 14, Con 11, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 8
SQ able to notice secret or concealed doors, armored 
mage*, spell power*
Spell-Like Abilities (CL 7th):
5/day—dancing lights, detect magic, f lare, ghost sound, 
read magic
Duskblade Spells Known (CL 7th):
2nd (6/day)—ghoul touch (+10 melee touch, DC 14), 
scorching ray (+9 ranged touch), swift f ly
1st (7/day) —ray of enfeeblement (+9 ranged touch), 
resist energy, shocking grasp (+10 melee touch), swift 
expeditious retreat, true strike
0 (6/day)—acid splash, disrupt undead, ray of frost (+9 
ranged touch), touch of fatigue (+10 melee touch, 
DC 12)
Feats Combat Casting
B
, Combat Expertise, Improved 
Initiative, Lightning Reflexes
Skills Concentration +10 (+14 casting defensively), 
Knowledge (arcana) +12, Knowledge (the planes) +12, 
Listen +2, Sense Motive +10, Spot +2
Possessions +1 breastplate, +1 light shield, +1 longsword, 
cloak of resistance +1, ring of protection +1
*Class features described on page 20
Duskblade Spell List
The  duskblade’s  spell  list  appears  below.  Spells  printed  in  
this book are marked with an asterisk.
    0    Level:  acid  splash,  disrupt  undead,  ray  of  frost,  touch  of  
fatigue.
     1st     Level: Bigby’s  tripping  hand*,  blade  of  blood*,  burning  
hands, cause fear, chill touch, color spray, jump, Kelgore’s fi re bolt*, 
lesser defl ect*, magic weapon, obscuring mist, ray of enfeeblement, 
resist energy, rouse*, shocking grasp, stand*, swift expeditious retreat, 
true strike.
     2nd     Level: animalistic power*, bear’s endurance, Bigby’s strik-
ing fi st*, bull’s strength, cat’s grace, darkvision, defl  ect*, dimension 
hop*, ghoul touch, Melf ’s acid arrow, scorching ray, see invisibility, 
seeking ray*, spider climb, stretch weapon*, sure strike*, swift fl y, 
swift invisibility, touch of idiocy.
     3rd     Level: crown of might*, crown of protection*, dispelling 
touch*, doom scarabs*, energy aegis*, energy surge*, greater magic 
weapon, halt*, keen edge, protection from energy, ray of exhaustion, 
regroup*, vampiric touch.
     4th     Level: Bigby’s interposing hand, channeled pyroburst*, 
dimension door, dispel magic, enervate, fi re shield, phantasmal 
killer, shout, toxic weapon*.
     5th     Level: Bigby’s clenched fist, chain lightning, disintegrate, 
hold monster, polar ray, slashing dispel*, sonic shield*, waves 
of fatigue.
KNIGHT
 “I offer you surrender or an honorable death in battle. The choice 
is yours.”
—Archibold the Impetuous
A knight is a proud, skilled melee combatant who fi  ghts  in  
the name of honor and chivalry. A knight relies on more 
than  a  sharp  sword  and  a  stout  suit  of  armor  to  defeat  her  
foes. Her drive, determination, and fi  ghting spirit allow her 
to control the battlefi eld in ways that others cannot match. 
A knight can challenge an opponent to a duel, calling upon 
the foe’s pride and ego to force his hand. The knight’s talent 
with  heavy  armor,  shields,  and  defensive  tactics  grant  her  
the ability to disrupt her foe’s plans. Only the most talented 
rog ues and monks can sl ip past a knight ’s defenses to str i ke at 
her allies. An adventuring group with wizards, sorcerers, and 
other lightly armored members thrives with the assistance 
of a knight. While the knight keeps enemies occupied, her 
allies can use their talents and abilities without fear of attack 
or harassment.
     The knight class is a great choice if you want to play a tough, 
durable melee combatant whose strong personality allows you 
to manipulate your foes. Wea ker foes cower in fear before you, 
whi le stronger foes move to str i ke you rather than your al l ies 
when you play on their egos and challenge them to duels. 
Your expertise in using armor and carrying a shield allows 
you to form an impregnable defensive line. Once you engage 
a foe, he has diffi  culty moving away to threaten your allies. 
If you want to be a front-line melee combatant who defends 
the rest of the party and manipulates opponents, the knight 
is a good choice.
MAKING A KNIGHT
A low-level knight is similar to a cross between a fi  ghter  and  
a bard. You have many hit points, a high Armor Class, and 
an ability similar to bardic music (the knight’s challenge 
class feature). You can pick a single foe, usually the one who 
poses the most dangerous physical threat, and gain a bonus 
on attack rolls and damage rolls against that opponent. You 
pqs
SWIFT EXPEDITIOUS RETREAT, SWIFT FLY, 
AND SWIFT INVISIBILITY
Three  spells  on  the  duskblade’s  spell  list—swift  expeditious  re-
treat, swift fly, and swift invisibility—appear in Spell Compendium. 
If you do not have that book, treat these spells as their nonswift 
versions, except that their casting time is 1 swift action and the 
duration of each spell is 1 round.
pqs
620_95374_Ch1.indd   24620_95374_Ch1.indd   242/8/06   2:55:39 PM2/8/06   2:55:39 PM

25
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
must pay close attention to the knight’s code of conduct, 
since it forbids you from taking advantage of several tactically 
useful situations.
     You excel in combat in a manner similar to a fi  ghter—but  
while a fighter can slay a monster, your primary talent is 
your ability to keep that monster away from your allies 
while you battle it. It might take you longer to win the 
day, but your many hit points and strong defensive abilities 
help preserve you. Best of all, your defense enables your 
allies to function at full capacity without being subject to 
the monster’s attacks. Any sorcerer or wizard in the party 
thrives when you are there to absorb attacks and hold back 
your mutual foes.
    As you advance in level, you gain the ability to dictate 
a foe’s actions, forcing him to attack you instead of other 
targets. Wea ker opponents, which t y pica l ly appear i n num-
bers too large for you to hold them all back, quail in terror 
when you menace them. Even if they slip past you, they 
ta ke penalties when they at tack your al l ies. Your knight ’s 
challenge and shield block class features combine to let 
you excel in one-on-one melee, granting you a bonus on 
attack rolls, damage rolls, and Armor Class against a single 
foe of your choice. If the group faces a mighty villain or a 
single, overwhelming physical threat, it’s up to you to keep 
the monster occupied while your allies cast their spells or 
maneuver for position.
 Abilities: You benefi  t from a high Charisma score, since 
it determines how often you can use some of your abilities 
and the save DC of those abilities. A high Constitution allows 
you to increase your already impressive hit point total, thus 
bolstering your capacity to defend your allies. Strength 
improves your combat abilities, making you more effective 
as a front-line character.
 Races: The majority of knights are dwarves, humans, and 
half-elves. The dwarf ’s tendency toward order, combined 
with that race’s militaristic bent, gives rise to fi ghting orders 
dedicated to upholding justice and obeying an honorable code. 
Dwarf knights also serve as wandering dispensers of justice 
between  isolated  settlements  who  enforce  the  rule  of  law  
and protect small clanholds. Humanity, with its sprawling 
kingdoms  and  empires,  produces  many  knights  who  fi  ght  
as  much  for  king  and  country  as  for  personal  honor  and  
monetar y rewards. Some hal f-elves enter into such ser v ice as 
well and can rise to high ranks within such orders. Gnomes 
and  half lings  rarely  become  knights,  since  the  knight’s  
straightforward code of conduct runs counter to the small 
races’ reliance on trickery and clever planning. Few half-orcs 
have the opportunity to become knights, but when they do 
their natural strength serves them well. Elf knights are rare, 
since elves prefer freedom and fl  exibility over the rigid code 
of honor all knights must follow.
 Alignment: Knights are always lawful. Their dedication 
to a code of conduct is but one expression of their devotion 
to order. Most knightly orders arise as institutions forged to 
protect a kingdom from invaders or to enforce the law against 
chaos from within.
 While knights value order, they tend in equal numbers 
toward good, evil, and neutrality. Lawful good knights see 
order as a tool to protect the innocent and weak from evil. 
Lawful  evil  knights  believe  that  the  social  order  serves  to  
reward the strong. Lawful neutral knights abhor the destruc-
tion and suffering that chaos can bring and so uphold order 
for its own sake.
 Starting Gold: 6d4×10 gp (150 gp).
 Starting Age: As paladin (PH 109).
CLASS FEATURES
Your class features involve mastering the use of armor and 
shields  and  learning  how  to  manipulate  your  foes  so  that  
melee combat takes place on your terms, not theirs.
 Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Knights are profi-
cient with all simple and martial weapons and with all 
armor (heavy, medium, and light) and all shields (except 
tower shields).
    Knight’s    Challenge: You r dau nt less fi  ghting spirit plays a 
major role in your fi  ghting style, as important as the strength 
of  your  arm  or  the  sharpness  of  your  blade.  In  battle,  you  
use the force of your personality to challenge your enemies. 
You can call out a foe, shouting a challenge that boosts his 
confi  dence, or issue a general challenge that strikes fear into 
weak opponents and compels strong opponents to seek you 
out  for  personal  combat.  By  playing  on  your  enemies’  ego,  
you can manipulate your foes.
     You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 
1/2 your class level + your Charisma bonus (minimum once 
per  day).  As  you  gain  levels,  you  gain  a  number  of  options  
that you can use in conjunction with this ability.
     Even if you and your foes lack a shared language, you can 
still effectively communicate through body language, tone, 
and certain oaths and challenges you learn from a variety of 
different tongues.
    Fighting Challenge (Ex): As a swift action, you can issue a 
challenge against a single opponent. The target of this ability 
must have an Intelligence of 5 or higher, have a language of 
some sort, and have a CR greater than or equal to your char-
acter level minus 2. If it does not meet these requirements, 
a use of this ability is expended without effect.
     If  the  target  does  meet  the  conditions  given  above,  you  
gain a +1 morale bonus on Will saves and a +1 morale bonus 
on  attack  rolls  and  damage  rolls  against  the  target  of  this  
ability. You fi  ght with renewed vigor and energy by placing 
your  honor  and  reputation  on  the  line.  If  your  chosen  foe  
reduces you to 0 or fewer hit points, you lose two uses of your 
knight’s challenge ability for the day because of the blow to 
your ego and confi  dence from this defeat.
    The effect of a fi ghting challenge lasts for a number of 
rounds equal to 5 + your Charisma bonus (if any).
     If you are capable of issuing a knight’s challenge more 
than once per day, you can use this ability more than once 
in a single encounter. If your first chosen foe is defeated 
or f lees the area, you can issue a new challenge to a dif-
ferent foe. You cannot switch foes if your original target is 
still active.
     At 7th level, the bonus you gain from this ability increases 
to +2. At 13th level, it rises to +3. At 19th level, it increases 
to +4.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   25620_95374_Ch1.indd   252/8/06   2:55:46 PM2/8/06   2:55:46 PM

26
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
    Test of Mettle (Ex): Starting at 4th level, you can shout a 
challenge to all enemies, calling out for the mightiest among 
them to face you in combat. Any target of this ability must 
have a language of some sort and an Intelligence score of 5 
or higher. Creatures that do not meet these requirements are 
immune to the test of mettle. You must have line of sight and 
line of effect to the targets of this ability.
     As a swift action, you can expend one use of your knight’s 
challenge ability to cause all your enemies within 100 feet 
with a CR greater than or equal to your character level minus 
2 to make Will saves (DC 10 + 1/2 your class level + your Cha 
modifi  er). Creatures that fail this save are forced to attack you 
with their ranged or melee attacks in preference over other 
available targets. If a foe attacks by casting a spell or using 
a supernatural ability, he must target you with the attack or 
include you in the effect’s area.
     A n opponent compel led to act in this manner is not thrown 
into a mindless rage and does not have to move to attack you 
in melee if doing so would provoke attacks of opportunity 
against him. In such a case, he can use ranged attacks against 
you or attack any opponents he threatens as normal. If anyone 
other  than  you  attacks  the  target,  the  effect  of  the  test  of  
mettle ends for that specifi  c  target.
    If you are reduced to 0 or fewer hit points by an oppo-
nent forced to attack you due to this ability, you gain one 
additional use of your knight’s challenge ability for that 
day. This additional use comes from increased confi  dence  
and the knowledge that you have proved your mettle as a 
knight against your enemies by calling out foes even against 
overwhelming odds. This additional use disappears if you 
have not used it by the start of the next day. You can only 
gain one additional use of your knight’s challenge ability in 
this manner per day.
    The effect of a test of mettle lasts for a number of rounds 
equal to 5 + your Charisma bonus (if any). Whether a creature 
fails or succeeds on its save against your test of mettle, it can 
only be targeted by this effect once per day.
    Call to Battle (Ex): Starting at 8th level, you become an 
inspiring figure on the battlefield. When all seems lost, 
you are a beacon of hope who continues to fight on despite 
the odds. No cause is yet lost when a knight still battles 
on its name.
     As a swift action, you can expend one use of your knight’s 
challenge ability to grant an ally another save against a fear 
effect.  The  target  gains  a  bonus  on  this  save  equal  to  your  
Charisma bonus (if any). If the target succeeds on this save, 
he gains the benefi t for a successful save against the attack 
or spel l. This abi l it y refl  ects your talent to inspire your al l ies 
in the face of a daunting foe.
     For example, Lidda fails her save against a lich’s fear spell. 
On his next action, Sir Agrivail uses his call to battle ability 
to grant Lidda another save. If she succeeds, she immediately 
shrugs off the effect of the fear spell.
     Daunting Challenge (Ex): Starting at 12th level, you can call 
out opponents, striking fear into the hearts of your enemies. 
In  this  manner  you  separate  the  strong-minded  from  the  
weak-willed,  allowing  you  to  focus  on  opponents  that  are  
worthy foes.
 As a swift action, you can expend one use of your knight’s 
challenge ability to issue a daunting challenge. This ability 
affects all creatures within 100 feet of you that have a CR less 
than your character level minus 2. Targets must be able to 
hear you, speak or understand a language of some sort, and 
have an Intelligence score of 5 or more. All targets who meet 
these  conditions  must  make  Will  saves  (DC  10  +  1/2  your  
class level + your Cha modifi  er) or become shaken.
Table 1–4: The Knight Hit Die: d12
                   Base
                   Attack                   Fort                   Ref                   Will
Level      Bonus      Save      Save      Save          Special
  1st +1 +0 +0 +2 Fighting challenge +1, knight’s challenge, knight’s code
  2nd +2 +0 +0 +3 Mounted Combat, shield block +1
  3rd +3 +1 +1 +3 Bulwark of defense
  4th +4 +1 +1 +4 Armor mastery (medium), test of mettle
  5th +5 +1 +1 +4 Bonus feat, vigilant defender
  6th +6/+1 +2 +2 +5 Shield ally
  7th +7/+2 +2 +2 +5 Fighting challenge +2
  8th +8/+3 +2 +2 +6 Call to battle 
  9th +9/+4 +3 +3 +6 Armor mastery (heavy)
10th           +10/+5           +3           +3           +7           Bonus           feat
11th +11/+6/+1 +3 +3 +7 Shield block +2
12th           +12/+7/+2           +4           +4           +8           Daunting           challenge
13th +13/+8/+3 +4 +4 +8 Fighting challenge +3
14th +14/+9/+4 +4 +4 +9 Improved shield ally
15th           +15/+10/+5         +5         +5         +9           Bonus         feat
16th +16/+11/+6/+1 +5 +5 +10 Bond of loyalty
17th            +17/+12/+7/+2            +5            +5            +10            Impetuous            endurance
18th           +18/+13/+8/+3           +6           +6           +11           —
19th +19/+14/+9/+4 +6 +6 +11 Fighting challenge +4
20th +20/+15/+10/+5 +6 +6 +12 Loyal beyond death, shield block +3
Class Skills (2 + Int modifier per level, ×4 at 1st level): Climb, Handle Animal, Intimidate, Jump, Knowledge (nobility and 
royalty), Ride, Swim.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   26620_95374_Ch1.indd   262/8/06   2:55:53 PM2/8/06   2:55:53 PM

27
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
     Whether  a  creature  fails  or  succeeds  on  its  save  against  
your daunting chal lenge, it can only be targeted by this ef fect 
once per day.
Bond of Loyalty (Ex): Starting at 16th level, your loyalty 
to your comrades endures even in the face of powerful 
magic. You can expend one use of your knight’s challenge 
ability to make an additional saving throw against a mind-
affecting spell or ability. You can use this ability once per 
round as a free action and can continue to use it even if an 
opponent is controlling your actions with a mind-affecting 
spell or ability.
     Loyal Beyond Death (Ex): At 20th level, if you are reduced 
to 0 or fewer hit points by an effect that otherwise leaves 
your body intact, you can expend one use of your knight’s 
challenge ability to remain conscious and continue to act for 
1 more round before dying. You can use this ability even if 
your hit point total is –10 or lower. If your body is somehow 
destroyed before your next action (such as by disintegrate), 
then you cannot act. You can continue to expend uses of your 
knight’s challenge ability to survive from round to round 
until you run out of uses. If you receive healing that leaves 
you with more than –10 hit points, you survive (or 
fall unconscious, as appropriate to your new hit 
point  total)  when  you  stop  using  this  
ability. Otherwise, death overtakes 
you when you run out of uses of your 
knight’s challenge ability.
     The Knight’s Code: You fi  ght not only to defeat your foes 
but to prove your honor, demonstrate your fi ghting ability, 
and win renown across the land. The stories that arise from 
your deeds are just as important to you as the deeds them-
selves. A good knight hopes that her example encourages 
others to lead righteous lives. A neutral knight wishes to 
uphold the cause of his liege (if he has one) and win glory. An 
evil knight seeks to win acclaim across the land and increase 
her own personal power.
     The knight’s code focuses on fair play: A victory achieved 
through pure skill is more diffi  cult, and hence wins more 
glory, than one achieved through trickery or guile.
•   A knight does not gain a bonus on attack rolls when fl  ank-
ing. You still confer the benefi  t of a fl  anking position to 
your ally, but you forgo your own +2 bonus on attack rolls. 
You can choose to keep the +2 bonus, but doing so violates 
your code of honor (see below).
•   A knight never strikes a fl  at-footed opponent. Instead, you 
allow your foe to ready himself before attacking.
•   A knight never deals lethal damage against a helpless foe. 
You can strike such a foe, but only with attacks that deal 
nonlethal damage.
If you violate any part of this code, you lose one use of 
your knight’s challenge ability for the day. If your 
knight’s challenge ability is not available when 
you violate the code (for example, if you have 
exhausted your uses for the day), you take a –2 
penalty on attack rolls and saves for the rest of 
that day. Your betrayal of your code of conduct 
undermines the foundation of confi  dence  and  
honor that drives you forward.
    Whi le you cleave to your v iew of hon-
or,  chivalry,  and  pursuit  of  glory,  you  
do  not  force  your  views  on  others.  You  
might chide a rogue for sneaking around 
a  battlefield,  but  you  recognize  (and  
perhaps even feel a bit smug about) the 
reality that not everyone is fi t to follow 
the knight’s path.
          Mounted     Combat:  At  2nd  level,  
you  gain  Mounted  Combat  as  a  
bonus feat.
       Shield Block (Ex): Starting 
at 2nd level, you excel in using 
your ar mor and shield to fr us-
trate  your  enemy’s  attacks.  
During  your  action,  des-
ignate a single opponent 
as the target of this abil-
ity.  Your  shield  bonus  
to  AC  against  that  foe  
increases by 1, as you move 
your shield to defl  ect an incoming blow, 
possibly providing just enough pro-
tection to turn a telling swing into a 
near miss.
Sir Agrivail and Lady Sorra, knights
Illus. by E. Polak
620_95374_Ch1.indd   27620_95374_Ch1.indd   272/8/06   2:56:00 PM2/8/06   2:56:00 PM

28
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
       This shield bonus increases to +2 at 11th level and +3 at 
20th level.
    Bulwark of Defense (Ex): When you reach 3rd level, an 
opponent that begins its turn in your threatened area treats 
all  the  squares  that  you  threaten  as  diffi  cult  terrain.  Your  
strict  vigilance  and  active  defensive  maneuvers  force  your  
opponents to move with care.
     Armor Mastery (Ex): Starting at 4th level, you are able to wear 
your armor like a second skin and ignore the standard speed 
reduction for wearing medium armor. Starting at 9th level, you 
ignore the speed reduction imposed by heavy armor as well.
     Bonus     Feat: At 5th level, you gain a bonus feat chosen from 
the following list: Animal Affi  nity, Diehard, Endurance, Great 
Fortitude, Iron Will, Quick Draw, Ride-By Attack, Spirited 
Charge, Trample, or Weapon Focus (lance). You must still meet 
any prerequisites for the feat. You gain an additional bonus 
feat from this list at 10th level and again at 15th level.
    Vigilant Defender (Ex): Starting at 5th level, you stand 
your  ground  against  all  enemies,  warding  the  spot  where  
you make your stand to prevent foes from slipping past and 
attacking those you protect. If an opponent attempts to use 
the Tumble ski l l to move through your threatened area or your 
space without provoking attacks of opportunity, the Tumble 
check DC to avoid your attacks of opportunity increases by 
an amount equal to your class level.
     Shield  Ally  (Ex):  Starting  at  6th  level,  as  an  immediate  
action you can opt to absorb part of the damage dealt to an 
adjacent ally. Each time this ally takes damage from a physical 
attack before your next turn, you can take half this damage 
on yourself. The target takes the other half as normal. You can 
only absorb damage from physical melee attacks and ranged 
attacks, such as an incoming arrow or a blow from a sword, 
not from spells and other effects.
 Improved Shield Ally (Ex): At 14th level, your abilit y 
to absorb damage increases. Once per round you can absorb 
all  the  damage  from  a  single  attack  directed  against  an  
adjacent ally. In addition, you continue to absorb half the 
damage from other physical attacks on an adjacent ally, i f 
you so choose. You must decide whether to use this ability 
after the attacker determines that an attack has succeeded 
but before he rolls damage.
 Impetuous Endurance (Ex): Star ting at 17th level, your 
fi ghting spirit enables you to push your body beyond the 
nor mal l imits of endurance. You no longer automatical ly fai l 
a saving throw on a roll of 1. You might still fail the save if 
your result fails to equal or beat the DC.
PLAYING A KNIGHT
As a knight, you are driven to prove your abilities, showcase 
the code of chivalry as a proper way to live, and defend your 
allies. You are impetuous and brave, never backing down from 
a challenge. When you face a mighty foe, you take a moment 
to call out a challenge to him, salute his fi ghting ability, or 
list his crimes that you seek to avenge.
Religion
Knights value order and honor in all things. They worship 
lawful gods, though whether their patrons are good, neutral, 
or evil depends solely on the knight’s preferences. Good 
knights  favor  Heironeous,  while  neutral  ones  follow  St.  
Cuthbert. Evil knights, if they venerate a god, offer prayers 
to Hextor. Knights of Heironeous and Hextor are renowned 
for  the  epic  duels  they  have  fought  against  each  other.  
Opposing  armies  sometimes  halt  their  advance  to  allow  
these sworn enemies to duel to the death before the rest of 
the battle is joined.
Other Classes
You respect paladins for their skill in combat and devotion to 
a code of conduct, although their path is somewhat different 
from your own. You see wizards, sorcerers, clerics, and bards 
as useful allies who should stay back away from combat; indi-
vidual knights sometimes travel partnered with a member of 
one of these classes. Most knights consider barbarians to be 
crazed lunatics who lack the honor, self-control, and training 
to fi  ght in a proper civilized manner, yet a skilled barbarian 
can earn a knight’s grudging respect through deeds in battle. 
You have l it tle regard for rog ues, beg ui lers, or others who rely 
on stealth or deceit. In general, you have no feeling one way 
or the other toward druids, monks, and rangers. You distrust 
the duskblade’s mix of melee combat and spellcasting but can 
empathize with the dragon shaman’s devotion to his totem 
dragon,  though  you  might  be  wary  of  particular  shamans  
(those devoted to chaotic dragons). In general, you feel protec-
tive (but with a touch of condescension) toward adventurers 
who cannot handle heavy armor and weapons.
Combat
You serve two basic roles in battle. You excel at dominating 
the fi eld of battle, since your defensive abilities make it dif-
fi  cult for opponents to move past you and strike vulnerable 
members of your party. You believe that the best way to face 
an enemy is to challenge him to an honorable duel and kill 
him fair and square, claiming all the glory for yourself. When 
faced with multiple foes, you can strike fear into some and 
goad others into attacking you rather than your allies. You are 
the sorcerer’s, wizard’s, or bard’s best friend. Your command-
ing presence draws attacks to you, while your hit points and 
heavy armor make you ideally suited to absorb blows. While 
you  are  engaging  foes  in  combat,  your  allies  can  use  their  
spells and special abilities without interference.
Advancement
When looking at feats to select as you gain levels, you have 
two  basic  paths.  You  can  focus  on  your  fi ghting skill, or 
you can attempt to expand your capabilities to serve as the 
party’s spokesman. The former option is best when you are 
the group’s primary combat specialist. If the party includes 
a  barbarian,  paladin,  fi  ghter,  ranger,  or  duskblade,  you  can  
afford to dabble in feats that improve your Charisma-based 
skills.  Although  Diplomacy  is  not  a  class  skill  for  you,  the  
Skill Focus feat combined with your superior Charisma and 
a few cross-class ranks makes you a serviceable emissary.
     When it comes to combat feats, look to ones that improve 
your  ability  to  deal  damage.  Your  class  features  already  
enhance your defense, making feats such as Power Attack, 
620_95374_Ch1.indd   28620_95374_Ch1.indd   282/8/06   2:56:10 PM2/8/06   2:56:10 PM

29
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
Weapon Focus, and so forth excellent options to boost your 
offense.  Alternatively,  you  could  focus  on  crippling  your  
foe’s  ability  to  deal  damage.  Combat  Expertise  combined  
with Improved Disarm and Improved Trip form a potent 
combo. When you lure a foe into attacking you, you can pluck 
his weapon from his hand or knock him to the ground. In 
either case, your opponent is neutralized as a threat to you 
or your allies.
    Improved Initiative is a critically important feat, since it 
allows you to act fi  rst, move forward, and defend your allies. 
The sooner you fi  nd a place at the front line, the longer you 
can hold back the monsters.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Cavalier
Human Knight
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 12, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 14.
     Skills:     Diplomacy, Knowledge (nobility and royalty), Ride.
     Feats:     Mounted Combat, Skill Focus (Ride).
     Weap o ns :     Lance (1d8/×3), longsword (1d8/19–20), three 
javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
     Armor:     Chain shirt (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 11 gp.
Package 2: The Defender
Dwarf Knight
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 12, Con 15, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 12.
    Skills:    Diplomacy, Ride.
     Feat: Shield Specialization (heavy).
     Weap o ns :     Dwarven waraxe (1d10/×3), warhammer (1d8/×3), 
5 javelins (1d6, 30 ft.)
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy steel shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 18 gp.
Package 3: The Destroyer
Half-Orc Knight
    Ability    Scores:    Str 16, Dex 12, Con 13, Int 8, Wis 8, Cha 13.
    Skill:    Intimidate.
     Feat: Power Attack.
     Weap o ns :     Battleaxe (1d8/×3), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy steel shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 50 gp.
KNIGHTS IN THE WORLD
“I like having a knight in front of me in a fi  ght. He holds the line 
and allows me to work my spells in peace. Best of all, so long as 
he has his back to me I can’t hear him prattling on about honor, 
strength, and chivalry.”
—Vaarlis Runespeaker, mage-initiate of Wee Jas
The concept of the knight, or cavalier, or chevalier has arisen 
in many cult ures that used mounted war r iors in their ar mies. 
Typically,  knights  were  members  of  the  rich,  land-owning  
upper class who could afford to buy and maintain heavy 
armor and a horse. Such individuals served an elite role in 
the military not only for their fi  ghting talents and ability to 
ride over and smash through infantry who lacked polearms 
but also for their social standing. For the historical knight, 
his status as a rich landowner was the basis of his superiority 
to others. Legend transformed the concept of the knight to 
focus on one who sets forth searching for deeds that will win 
him glory, drawing on his code of conduct and charismatic 
personality to defeat his enemies. Since a character who 
owns land and sits on a fortune in gold makes for a poor 
adventurer in a traditional D&D game, the knight character 
class  focuses  on  the  concept  of  a  heavily  armored  melee  
combatant who fi  ghts according to a strict code of conduct. 
Fidelity to that code grants the knight the confi  dence  and  
fi  ghting spir it to excel on the bat tlefi  eld and hence the glory 
he or she seeks.
Daily Life
A knight adventures to prove her skill at arms, to advance 
the cause of whatever lord she might serve, and to further 
her own aims. She rides forth from her lord’s castle to right 
wrongs, quest in her lord’s name, and prove herself worthy 
of knighthood. By actively seeking fame, glory, and acclaim, 
the  knight  brings  praise  and  respect  to  the  code  of  honor  
that she fi  ghts  under.
 Some knights are lone wanderers with neither castle nor 
king. A bloody war might leave a knight without a master. 
Homeless and with little more than her armor and weapons, 
this  knight  adventures  to  further  the  cause  she  still  holds  
dear. She could work to bring down the enemies who defeated 
her lord or attempt to do as much good across the land as 
possible, winning glory all the while. She might seek for a 
new cause worthy of her devotion. The knight’s order might 
fall, but the concepts of honor and chivalry endure so long 
as one knight holds them dear.
    Other knights are similar to paladins in that they place 
their faith in a cause, though for a knight this cause is 
rooted in the world rather than a divine power. A knight 
might fi  ght against oppression and brutality in all its forms, 
such as when a dwar f k night vent ures i nto t he u nderg rou nd 
with his companions on a crusade to defeat drow, duergar, 
and  other  horrors  before  they  can  threaten  the  surface.  
Such a knight doesn’t need a lord or an order. A l l he needs 
is a sharp sword, a stout shield, and an indomitable belief 
in his cause.
    The knight of the D&D game is a wanderer who hunts 
down the red dragon that has despoiled the countryside, or 
the hero who mans the walls and rallies the town guard when 
a horde of orcs appears on the horizon. The knight fi  ghts  for  
a cause, and it matters not whether that cause is upholding 
the crown or a ceaseless desire to bring justice and hope to 
the land.
Notables
Knights gain notoriety for their deeds, whether triumphs in 
combat or selfl ess acts of great honor. Many an adventurer 
grew up on stories such as that of Archibold the Impetuous, 
who after the defeat of his liege’s army stood alone to block 
pursuit on a narrow bridge while his allies withdrew to safety. 
The bards claim that Sir Archibold slew more than a hundred 
hobgoblins before he fi  nally fell, by which time his allies had 
reached the safety of a nearby fortress.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   29620_95374_Ch1.indd   292/8/06   2:56:17 PM2/8/06   2:56:17 PM

30
CHAPTER 1
NEW CLASSES
     Another  legend  tells  of  Lady  Attis,  an  evil  but  brave  
knight  who  drove  off  a  rampaging  red  dragon  that  had  
terrorized the region, not from any benefi cence toward the 
inhabitants  but  to  win  the  fame  of  defeating  a  foe  no  one  
else dared face.
Organizations
Knights often band together into orders of knighthood, and 
many of these organizations have storied histories. Knightly 
orders typically allow their members to spend much of their 
time on individual quests, requiring only that the knight 
live by the code of the order and be willing to return to the 
order’s  headquarters  when  called  upon.  Knightly  orders  
have a proud tradition of using heraldic symbols to identify 
themselves,  and  knights  who  belong  to  the  order  often  
carry these symbols on their shields and armor to identify 
their affi liation.
NPC Reactions
Individuals react to knights based on their previous interac-
tions with other members of the class. A heroic knight meets 
stony silence and suspicion in a land where evil knights 
oppress the poor. By the same token, a villainous knight 
finds that folk who assume knights are chivalrous, fair, 
and honorable are quick to trust her and willing to believe 
the best about her. Such trust might indeed bring out the 
best in her, or it might lead swiftly to disaster, depending 
on the knight.
     A  knight  who  has  retired  from  adventuring  typically  
acquires some position of authority, with commensurate 
political power, whether as general, king’s champion, or ruler 
of some cit y or out post. People’s opinions of knights are thus 
often the same as their views of authority in general.
KNIGHT LORE
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (nobility and royalty) 
can research knights to learn more about them. When a char-
acter makes a skill check, read or paraphrase the following, 
including the information from lower DCs.
    DC    10: Knights are skilled mounted fi  ghters who special-
ize in defensive combat.
 DC 15:  Knights  are  combat-oriented  characters  adept  at  
protecting their companions and stopping foes from getting 
past them. They follow a strict code of honor.
 DC 20: Knights are masters of armor and shield use. They 
can lure foes into one-on-one combat through sheer force 
of will.
KNIGHTS IN THE GAME
Because of their obvious place in real-world history, knights 
fi  t well into any campaign with a medieval setting. The class 
can be available to characters of almost any race or origin, 
or you can tie the class to a specific kingdom or group of 
cultures in your campaign world. Either way, the knight 
provides an exciting option for players interested in a melee-
oriented character capable of holding a line of combat and 
really protecting her allies, as well as challenging monsters 
in single combat.
Adaptation
This class can fi  t in a campaign in many ways—to serve a 
specifi  c plot need, you can tie its history to a race or add a con-
nection to a mysterious organization. The class description 
assumes that many races and cultures produce knights, but in 
your world perhaps only lawful societies might fi  eld  knights  
as part of their armed forces, creating an instant and fl  avorful  
difference between lawful and chaotic culture groups. If you 
take this route, create a chaotic-oriented group of hexblades, 
rangers, or scouts who oppose the order of knights.
Sample Encounter
A knight can be encountered anywhere her quest for glory 
might take her: at the head of an enemy army, on a lone 
mission into the underground, or simply wandering the 
countryside looking for suitable challenges. A knight often 
appears partnered with an arcane or divine spellcaster, since 
the knight’s class features work best in conjunction with an 
unarmored or lightly armored partner.
 EL 7: Lady Sorra adheres to the code of knighthood for one 
reason: it seems the fastest way to gain power in a world where 
those of common birth lack opportunity. She could make a 
temporary ally or suitable antagonist for any adventuring 
group, perhaps fi  rst appearing as an ally in one adventure and 
then again later in another as an antagonist. In the latter case, 
she is likely to be found serving as the personal bodyguard 
of a powerful evil spellcaster.
Lady Sorra CR 7
Female human knight 7
LE Medium humanoid
Init +5; Senses Listen +0, Spot +0
Languages Common
AC 21, touch 12, flat-footed 20; shield block* +1
hp 65 (7 HD)
Fort +7, Ref +4, Will +8
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee +1 longsword +11/+6 (1d8+4/19 –20)
Base Atk +7; Grp +10
Atk Options Cleave, Power Attack, fighting challenge* +2, 
test of mettle
Abilities Str 16, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 12
SQ armor mastery*, knight’s challenge* 4/day, knight’s 
code*, shield ally*, vigilant defender*, wall of steel*
Feats Cleave, Great Fortitude
B
, Improved Initiative, Iron Will, 
Mounted Combat
B
, Power Attack
Skills Handle Animal +11, Intimidate +11
Possessions +1 breastplate, +1 heavy shield, +1 longsword, 
cloak of resistance +1, ring of protection +1
*Class features described on pages 25–28
EX-KNIGHTS
A knight who is no longer lawful loses the benefi  ts of her 
knight’s challenge ability. As a result, she cannot use class 
features  that  require  her  to  expend  uses  of  the  knight’s  
challenge ability, such as fi ghting challenge, test of mettle, 
and call to battle. She no longer takes penalties for violating 
her code of conduct.
    A knight can regain her status by returning to a lawful 
alignment.
620_95374_Ch1.indd   30620_95374_Ch1.indd   302/8/06   2:56:24 PM2/8/06   2:56:24 PM

he choice of a class delineates some of the most 
important aspects of a D&D character. With a class 
comes a specifi  c role in the party, baseline mechani-
cal attributes such as base attack and base save 
bonuses, and a host of special abilities that defi  ne  
the character. To complement the eleven standard 
classes presented in the Player’s Handbook, supplements such 
as the Complete series have introduced additional classes. This 
chapter provides advice and insight on eighteen classes that 
fi  t well within most D&D games and presents a set of options 
to enhance characters of that class.
    Each class presentation in this chapter includes sample 
character themes that help define a character’s role and 
personality. These are not intended as an exhaustive catalog, 
and you are not required to adopt any of them. Each class 
entry also includes suggested backgrounds and suggested 
personality archetypes; see Chapter 5 for more information 
on these elements.
    In addition to this roleplaying advice, each presentation 
offers one or more alternative class features and a set of alterna-
tive starting packages.
     Alternative class features replace class features found in 
the original class description. If you have already reached 
or  passed  the  level  at  which  you  can  take  the  feature,  you  
can use the retraining option described on page 192 to gain 
an alternative class feature in place of the normal feature 
gained at that level.
     The  format  for  alternative  class  features  is  summa-
rized below.
ALTERNATIVE CLASS 
FEATURE NAME
A general description of the ability and why you might 
want to consider it.
 Level: You can select the alternative class feature only 
at this level (unless you are using the retraining option 
described in Chapter 8).
 Replaces: This line identifi es the ability that you 
must sacrifi  ce to gain the alternative class feature.
 Benefit: This section describes the mechanical 
effects of the new ability.
NEW STARTING PACKAGES
The final section of each of the presentations in 
this chapter is a set of three new starting packages 
for each class, each one designed for a character 
that  fills  a  particular  role  in  the  adventuring  
party. For details about how to use these starting 
packages (and to modify them, if you desire), see 
page 5.
31
Illus. by R. HorsleyIllus. by R. Horsley
620_95374_Ch2.indd   31620_95374_Ch2.indd   312/8/06   3:09:40 PM2/8/06   3:09:40 PM

32