CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
    This is not to disparage an individual’s focus. Indeed, 
affi  liations  highlight  individuals  in  the  same  way  that  a  
background  serves  to  defi  ne  the  fi  gure  of  a  portrait.  You  
need not be interested in world-spanning politics to fi  nd  
value in affi liations. Has your character ever recovered the 
poison sack from a monstrous scorpion, or a kuo-toa’s idol 
of Blibdoolpoolp, or yet another masterwork sword from a 
bandit chief? Affi  liations give you a ready place to liquidate 
such treasures. Has your character ever been drained by a 
shadow, ridden by a night hag, or victimized by an ethereal 
fi  lcher? Hire an affi  liation member to restore your strength, 
exorcise your demons, or track down the planar pickpocket 
while you concentrate on your main quest. Advancing in 
your affi  liation can be almost as important to your character’s 
development as attaining new levels.
    Affi  l iations also al low your character to do things that she 
other w ise would not be able to do. Ever wanted to open your 
own tavern? Start your own smithy or weapon shop? Preach 
to a congregation of thousands? Clear Stirge Ridge, raise a 
curtain wall and a donjon, and assume the responsibility of 
nobility? Affi  liations allow you to do this and more.
THE TWO CATEGORIES 
OF AFFILIATIONS
Like-minded  individuals  might  gather  in  an  affi  liation  for  
any number of reasons, but at the fundamental level there are 
two basic categories of affi  liations: social and racial.
Social Affiliations
A social affi  liation is formed when individuals with a common 
interest come together to promote or protect that cause. It’s 
that common interest, rather than any physical or professional 
similarity (such as race or class), that binds the members.
    The most energetic or accomplished people among the 
membership have the best chance of rising to a high rank 
within the group. Conversely, members who fail to advance 
the cause can see their status drop drastically—sometimes 
so drastically that they are forced to leave the affi  liation.
Racial Affiliations
As  the  name  implies,  a  racial  affiliation  is  only  open  to  
individuals of the race in question. It’s conceivable that, in 
the context of a given campaign, a human might perform an 
amazing deed that causes a group of dwarves to offer him a 
place in their affi liation, but such occurrences should be 
exceedingly rare.
    Racial    affi  liations differ from social affi  liations in a number 
of ways. It’s usually easier for a member of a racial affi  liation  
to maintain his stat us even i f he fai ls in an endeavor, because 
racial affi liations don’t typically penalize their members 
in such cases. Also, members of racial affi liations usually 
gain some tangible (that is, game-related) benefi  t  from  their  
membership at a lower level of status than is the case in 
social affi liations.
WHY JOIN AN AFFILIATION?
Affi liations can be viewed as another type of treasure. The 
coffer of rubies might have fallen into the acid swamp and 
melted, but the Brotherhood of Bahamut holds you in high 
esteem for slaying the young black dragon. Your standing 
in  the  Brotherhood  goes  up,  and  next  time,  instead  of  
tithing a church to grow back your shield arm or empty-
ing your gem pouch to book passage on a shady captain’s 
barkentine, the Brothers will cast regenerate or wind walk 
for you, free of charge. In this way, an a f fi  liation  serves  you,  
the same way that your sword, your spellbook, and your 
gold benefi  t  you.  
     You  can  also  consider  affi liations as an additional class 
feature. The Skill Focus (Gather Information) feat provides 
a bonus on Gather Information checks, but so too does suf-
fi  cient stat us in an a f fi  l iation of thieves. Join an a f fi  liation  of  
sages to gain bonuses on Knowledge checks. As you increase 
in  status,  you  gain  more  affiliation  benefits  and  greater  
personal power (as well as face greater risks and enemies).
     You r     a f fi  liation brings rich potential to role-playing. The 
group can create many opportunities, including adding foils 
for your PC, rivals vying for your rank, and steadfast allies 
that can provide aid or request it of you. Affi liations also 
help drive your character’s motivations; when considering 
your character’s background, you should understand how 
his affi  liations  fi  t  in.
     From the Dungeon Master’s point of view, affi  liations  can  
be used to spur adventures, to lend the world verisimilitude, 
to introduce NPCs, to act as treasure and reward, and even 
to explain the occasional deus ex machina (even the best cam-
paigns can benefi t from such a device from time to time!). 
You should work w ith your DM to deter mine what a f fi  liations  
are available to your character. Perhaps your Dungeon Master 
will allow you to create your own affi liation and join it (or 
found it). You should also discuss possible NPC and enemy 
affi liations in the campaign. Affi liations with goals inimi-
cal to your own can serve as challenges that highlight your 
character and his allies—the Sun Fane of Pelor is opposed 
to the Reviled of Laogzed, while the King’s Navy scours the 
seas through storm and swell to harry the Thunder Sail Argosy 
pirate fl  eet.
    Also, while the affairs of some affi  liations might be fi  xed  
in the campaign world fi  rmament, unchanging outside of 
DM fi  at, others can be more dynamic. Evolv ing a f fi liations 
add another dimension to your game. Using the materials 
presented later in this chapter, you and your DM can make 
your affi  liations change as the world does, even in response 
to your character’s actions.
     No matter how you interact with affi  liations, keep in mind 
that the goal is to have fun. Whether your thieves guild is 
a static fi xture whose future is unquestionably secure, or 
whether it is a ragtag band of merry companions constantly 
on the run from the city watch and in danger of extermina-
tion or gaol, you should enjoy affi  liations as you wish.
MEMBERSHIP HAS ITS PRIVILEGES
You have a separate affi  liation score for each affi  liation,  but  
need only track those important to you. Your affi  liation  score  
defi nes your status in that group. Rising in status can earn 
benefi ts such as an offer of membership, a monthly fl  ow  of  
gold and emeralds, or research time at a wizard college. 
620_95374_Ch7.indd   164620_95374_Ch7.indd   1642/8/06   4:20:09 PM2/8/06   4:20:09 PM

165
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
    You can’t get ahead in an affiliation without devoting 
some of your character ’s time and ef for t to the cause. You 
might  have  to  bring  treasure  to  dragons,  behead  rival  
chieftains,  break  your  half ling  comrades  out  of  jail,  or  
perform any number of other types of activities. Your affil-
iation will be willing 
to meet you halfway, 
but you’ve got to help 
the  group  out  if  you  
want the rewards.
 Multiple Affi  liations:  
You can be associated with 
multiple  affi  liations  at  one  
time.  However,  each  sub-
sequent affi liation is harder 
to maintain. The fi  rst  affi  liation  
that  you  have  (your  primary  affi  li-
ation) imposes a –10 penalty on all 
other  affi  liation  scores.  Subsequent  
affi  liations oppose an additional –5 
penalty  to  each  affi  liation  that  you  
gain afterward. In other words, you 
can have one affi  liation score with no 
penalty, a second at –10, a third 
at –15, a fourth at –20, and so 
on. High-level characters are 
usually able to maintain one 
or two affi  liations of note but 
only  minor  associations  with  
other organizations.
    Some    affi  liations  might  not  be  
compatible, and the DM has fi  nal  
say  on  such  issues.  For  ex-
a mple, i n a ca mpaig n where 
the human kingdom of Al-
thar  wars  with  the  elven  
realm of Gaelian, the DM 
might rule that no char-
acter with an affi  liation  
to the Knights of Althar 
can also have an affi  liation  
with the Greenfold Rangers 
of Gaelian.
Multiple Affi  liation  Ben-
efits:  If  you  have  multiple  
affi  liations, you can only gain the benefi  ts of one affi liation 
at a time. If you have a high enough affi  liation score to gain 
benefi  ts from more than one affi  liation, choose which set of 
affi liation benefi ts affect you at the beginning of each day. 
You gain all the benefits for which you qualify from the 
chosen affiliation.
F E AT URE S OF AFFIL IAT IONS
You r  a f fi liation has many features, some primarily of use 
in roleplaying and background. These aspects include such 
basic information as the affi  liation’s name and its background, 
goals,  and  dreams.  Most  affiliations  have  a  symbol  that  
enables members to identify one another. An affiliation’s 
description might include information about high-ranking 
members and how the group feels about members joining or 
leaving its ranks, as well as facts about the group’s signifi cant 
enemies or allies. If an affi  liation has a secret that relates to 
the group’s basic nature or how it operates, that information 
is provided.
    Some of an affi  liation’s features come into play when you 
join it or advance in it. Still others can be used to affect your 
campaign world. The following features are 
common to all affi  liations.
  Ty p e : An affi  liation  can  be  of  
one  of  the  following  ten  types:  
business,  cabal,  college,  druid  
circle, fi  ghting company, govern-
ment, spy ring, temple, thieves’ 
guild, or tribe. An affi  liation’s  
type limits the kinds of ex-
ecutive  powers  wielded  by  
its  leaders,  and  whether  
it is better at fighting, 
spying,  or  negotiation.  In  
the example affi  liation  de-
scriptions  that  follow,  a  
racial affi liation is identi-
fi ed by the word “racial” in 
parentheses after its type. All 
other  example  affi liations 
are social.
  Scale: An affiliation’s 
scale is a measure of its scope 
of infl  uence. As affi  liations  grow  
in size and power, t hey i ncrease 
the  scale  of  their  activities.  
The Bulette Rampant Mer-
cenary  Company  could  
be  as  inconsequential  as  
a  cadre  of  men-at-arms  
with  a  rotting  ballista  
or as mighty as an army 
for hire with half a doz-
en  battalions  and  fl ying 
dragon support. An affi  l-
iation’s scale can be from 1 to 
20 and is also defi  ned  by  a  de-
scriptive  term  that  indicates  
the  extent  of  its  infl  uence.  Scale  directly  affects  an  affi  l-
iation’s  capital  and  its  ability  to  project  power.  Table  7–1,  
on page 184. 
 Affi  liation  Score  Criteria: Base requirements for mem-
bership, if any, are given here. An affi liation might have 
race, nationality, alignment, class, or some other baseline 
membership criteria. The table in this portion of an affi  liation  
description  lists  a  number  of  factors  and  how  they  impact  
your affi  liation score in that group. 
 Titles, Benefi ts, and Duties: A title is a designation of 
rank within the affi  liation’s hierarchy. Characters with an 
affi  liation  score  of  3  or  lower  are  usually  not  considered  
members. In social affi liations, members with affi liation 
The halfl ings of the Caravan of Shadows (see page 169) 
stay one step ahead of the authorities
Illus. by E. Widermann
620_95374_Ch7.indd   165620_95374_Ch7.indd   1652/8/06   4:20:16 PM2/8/06   4:20:16 PM

166
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
scores from 4 to 10 are generally looked upon as probation-
ary members. A character with an affi  liation score of 30 or 
higher attains the most prestigious title.
    Lower-rank    benefi  ts car r y over to higher ranks, but nor mal 
stacking rules apply.
    Even  if  you  have  founded  your  own  affiliation  (as  
opposed  to  positing  the  existence  of  one  that  you  can  
join  as  a  recruit),  you  still  must  increase  your  affi liation 
score normally before you can gain the benefi ts (and take 
on the duties) of a titled member of your affi liation. This 
represents the fact that you can’t simply say, “I am founding 
an  affi  liation,”  and  by  virtue  of  that  declaration  become  
entitled to send an assassin after the duke or bring a plague 
to the eastern river tribes. Rather, you must establish your 
affiliation as a force in the world by satisfying affiliation 
score criteria, proving by virtue of your deeds that your 
affi liation is a force to be reckoned with and a player on 
the political stage.
 Executive  Powers:  Executive  powers  are  wielded  by  
the affiliation’s leadership, generally those members with 
an affi  liation score of at least 30. If a PC achieves a higher 
affi  liation score than a leader NPC, the NPC might quietly 
step  aside  in  favor  of  the  newcomer.  Many  affiliations,  
however, force the two contenders to duel or to match wits 
in some fashion.
     Unless other w ise noted, an a f fi  liation’s leadership can use 
one executive power per month.
     Details  about  executive  powers  are  given  starting  on  
page 186.
MAKING AFFILIATIONS DYNAMIC
The noon air cooled, and a shadow drifted across the bright silver 
coins stacked in Tabark’s scales. The moneychanger looked up 
from his table in the bazaar and saw the clouds darkening. Large 
black raindrops began to fall. When the fi rst blue lizard thudded 
onto his table, upsetting the scales and sending the silver coins 
tinkling into the air, Tabark realized this was no summer squall. 
“The R e viled! ” he screamed. “Laog zed’s pr ies ts plag ue us! ” He ran 
for the Sun Fane as the lizard deluge began in earnest, reptiles 
plummeting through awnings and crashing into fruit stands, 
each  lizard’s  body  wrapped  with  crackling  lightning  and  frigid  
from its recent altitude.
     When you play with affi  liations, a new avenue for confl  ict  
resolution and storytelling opens. Plagues, the births of 
kingdoms, wars, naval blockades, arcane research break-
throughs, trade embargoes, and other factors become part of 
your campaign in new ways. Your character need no longer 
do everything from winning the Battle of Stirge Ridge to 
lifting the curse on the southern farmlands to negotiating 
peace with the Frost Cavern quaggoths. You and your DM 
can rely on your a f fi  liation to accomplish some of these tasks 
while you spend the bulk of your time focusing on your PC’s 
main quest.
     Have you ever wondered who will watch your character’s 
family, castle, or subjects when he is off adventuring? If your 
PC is part of the Bulette Rampant mercenary company, you 
can  simply  have  a  detachment  from  your  battalion  watch  
over your loved ones. If your DM determines that the Valx 
Nine-Eyes criminal syndicate strikes at your family while you 
are adventuring underground, you can resolve the attempt 
by playing out the details (in the absence of your character) 
or, more simply, by using opposed violence checks for your 
mercenary company and the brute squad sent by the beholder. 
(Violence checks are described below.) 
    Have you ever picked up a powerful magic item, say a 
+2 thunder ing dire f lail, that no one in the party could use? 
Campaign credulity is stretched by simply selling it to an 
anonymous buyer who just happens to have 36,500 gp ready 
to spend. Instead, you donate it to your a f fi  liation  and  increase  
its capital—it is reasonable to assume that a sizable affi  liation  
includes a member who knows (or now wants desperately to 
learn) how to use a dire fl  ail.
    Have  you  ever  heard  yourself  utter  the  lines  that  
famously fill a DM’s heart with annoyance, frustration, 
and uncertainty? Namely, “Can I buy magic items?” When 
you use affiliations, businesses and colleges have the trade 
executive power, which allows some wondrous items to 
come up for sale in the campaign—if a character has the 
right connections.
     The  following  rules  help  guide  a  dynamic  approach  to  
affi  liations.
 Capital: An affi  liation starts play with capital equal to its 
scale. Capital represents different types of assets for different 
affi  liation types. A fi  ghting company has its capital invested 
in soldiers, armor, weapons, and transport, while a cabal has 
its capital invested in wondrous items, spellbooks, bound 
demon servants, and political secrets.
    In wartime and in months of hardship, your affi  liation’s  
capital might go down; in peacetime when trade prospers, 
your affi  liation’s capital might go up. An affi liation’s mini-
mum capital is 0; its maximum capital is twice its scale. If 
your  affi  liation  does  nothing  for  two  consecutive  months,  
normal daily processes increase its capital by 1. A good way 
to increase your affi liation’s capital is to donate treasure. 
For every 1,000 gp × your affi liation’s scale that you donate 
each month, its capital increases by 1. Thus, you must donate 
5,000 gp during the course of a month to increase a scale 5 
affi liation’s capital by 1. For an affi liation that has a scale 
greater than 10, you must donate treasure in the amount of 
10,000 gp × the scale to increase capital in this way. Such 
organizations have increased their scope to such an extent 
that they need not only gold, but vast tracts of real estate, 
arcane secrets, favors of the emperor, the name of the duke’s 
bastard son, and other nonmonetary items to increase their 
stature and power.
    An    affi  liation  whose  capital  falls  to  –1  is  disbanded  and  
cannot be refounded for a period of 1d4 months.
    An    affi liation whose capital remains at its maximum for 
a number of consecutive months equal to twice its scale 
improves one category in scale. For example, if a scale 4 busi-
ness maintains a capital of 8 for eight consecutive months, 
it becomes a scale 5 business.
    Violence    Check:  When  an  affiliation  attempts  to  do  
something using bullyboys, bludgeons, or battles, a violence 
check (1d20 + violence bonus) is made. Fighting companies, 
governments, and tribes have violence bonuses equal to 
620_95374_Ch7.indd   166620_95374_Ch7.indd   1662/8/06   4:20:26 PM2/8/06   4:20:26 PM

167
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
1/2 their scale. All other types of affi liations have violence 
bonuses equal to 1/4 their scale. 
    Espionage    Check:  An  affiliation’s  attempts  to  sneak  
around, gather information, and infi  ltrate opponents are all 
summed up using espionage checks (1d20 + espionage bonus). 
Cabals, spy rings, and thieves guilds have espionage bonuses 
equal to 1/2 their scale. All other types of affi  liations  have  
espionage bonuses equal to 1/4 their scale. 
    Negotiation    Check: Convincing arguments, delicate 
engagements, and subtle (perhaps even magical) manipula-
tion  are  the  province  of  an  affi  liation’s  negotiation  checks  
(1d20 + negotiation bonus). Businesses, colleges, druid circles, 
and temples have negotiation bonuses equal to 1/2 their scale. 
All other types of affi  liations have negotiation bonuses equal 
to 1/4 their scale. 
EXAMPLE AFFILIATIONS 
The following affi  liations are representative of the standard 
D&D world and adaptable for most campaigns. Don’t be shy 
about renaming or revising any of the example affi liations 
described below. The more specifi  c to your world that you 
ma ke them, the more l i kely they are to come to l i fe at your 
gaming table.
BLOODFIST TRIBE
    Symbol: The members of the Bloodfi  st Tribe emblazon 
their shields and tents with a red upraised fi  st, and many dye 
their sword-arm gauntlets red as well.
Background, Goals, and Dreams: For centuries, the 
Bloodfist Tribe has wandered the wilderness of the north, 
following great herds of elk and bison. Half-orc youths 
who are outcasts from human or orc communities often 
find their way north and join the tribe, leaving their 
old lives behind.
     While it’s comforting to be among other 
half-orcs, life among the Bloodfi  sts  isn’t  
easy. The tribe often makes war against 
rival tribes of full-blooded orcs and 
fends  off  reprisals  from  the  hu-
man  communities  it  sometimes  
raids for food and supplies. Like 
hunter-gatherers everywhere, the 
Bloodfi sts risk starvation when-
ever hunting goes poorly or game 
is scarce. In hard times, the Blood fi  st  
Tribe shrinks from the attrition 
of war, starvation, and younger 
members head south to seek an 
easier life.
     The  Bloodfist  Tribe  leaders’  
primary concern is where next to 
march.  Sometimes  they  make  
war on the orcs and giants of 
the northern mountains, some-
times  they  raid  the  human  
lands  to  the  south,  and  some-
times they are content to follow 
the elk herds as they migrate. Leaders also spend a lot of time 
mediating disputes within the tribe. It’s no easy task to be 
the arbiter in a dispute when either aggrieved party can fl  y  
into a bloodthirsty rage at a moment’s notice.
 Ty p e : Tribe (racial).
Scale: 6 (city).
 Affi  liation Score Criteria: Only half-orcs are eligible 
to join the tribe. The Bloodfists have made war against 
orcs and humans too much to ever fully trust those not of 
mixed blood.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level  +1/2 PC’s level
Barbarian or shaman +2
Druid or ranger +1
Track feat +1
Assist tribe in major battle +1
Bring word of bountiful land (wilderness with plentiful 
game, frontier with poorly guarded villages) +1
Bring head of enemy chief to Bloodfist chieftain +2
 Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: The greatest reward of a f fi  li-
ation with the Bloodfi st Tribe is simply becoming part of a 
welcoming community with a shared heritage—something 
all too rare for half-orcs. But there’s an additional benefi t: the 
Blood Lodge, where worthy half-orcs test their resistance to 
pain and the strength of their blood.
     When the chieftain deems a Bloodfi  st member worthy, he 
directs the shamans to build an earthen lodge. The shamans 
then use fl  int knives to cause painful wounds to the half-
orc the tribe is honoring. Then the bleeding half-orc is 
enclosed in the Blood Lodge and suffers pain and waking 
nightmares  for  a  day  and  a  night.  
The Bloodfi st Tribe wanders the world, searching in vain for an ideal home
Illus. by S. Ellis
620_95374_Ch7.indd   167620_95374_Ch7.indd   1672/8/06   4:20:32 PM2/8/06   4:20:32 PM

168
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
When the lodge door opens, however, the ritual has served 
its purpose: The tribe member emerges tougher and more 
cunning than before.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–10                                Bloodfi st Tribe Member: +4 racial bonus on 
Survival checks.
11–15 Lodge of the Bear: +2 circumstance bonus 
on attempts to influence the attitude of 
Bloodfist half-orcs. If you are a barbarian, 
your rage lasts for an extra round.
16–22                            Lodge of the Dire Wolf: +2 inherent bonus 
to your Charisma or Intelligence score, 
+2 racial bonus on Fortitude saves, and 
+4 circumstance bonus on attempts to 
infl uence the attitude of Bloodfi st half-orcs.
23–29 Lodge of the Thunder Eagle: +8 racial bonus 
on Survival checks, +2 inherent bonus to 
whichever ability score you didn’t raise 
while at the Lodge of the Dire Wolf rank, 
and +8 circumstance bonus on attempts to 
influence the attitude of Bloodfist half-orcs.
30 or higher Lodge of the White Wyrm: Cold resistance 
10. When you emerge from the lodge, the 
tribe offers you a +2 weapon as a gift.
 Executive Powers: Plunder, raid, terrorize.
BRIGHTMANTLE WEAPON FORGE 
AND TRADING CONSORTIUM
    Symbol: The symbol of the Brightmantle Consortium is 
a forge over water.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: When the trees were 
new, and the earth chafed while the mountains grew in 
like baby’s teeth, legend goes that Durgan Brightmantle 
soothed the stone with gifts of ore and the sweet taste of 
gems. Countless eons later, a dwarf clan devoted to Durgan 
Brightmantle  and  the  extraction  of  the  earth’s  riches  
founded  their  business  based  on  mining  and  smithing.  
Since  then,  the  small  weapons  shop  in  Isher  has  grown  
into one of the most powerful trading enterprises in the 
known world, shipping goods across kingdoms and even 
overseas, hiring caravan guards and traveling casters and 
buying  land  for  forges  in  a  large  number  of  new  towns.  
Brightmantle has even created entire new towns at particu-
larly promising sites.
 Enemies  and  Allies:  Of  necessity,  the  Brightmantle  
Consortium maintains good relations with all the monarchs 
in its scope of infl  uence. Its relations with fi  ghting  companies  
are often strained, for while the latter are paid to go to war, 
business is diffi  cult in those times.
 Members: Most members of the Consortium are dwarves, 
although all the common races are represented.
    The Brightmantle Consortium works diligently to retain 
its members, not wishing to expend resources on training 
new ones. If one chooses to leave, however, the Consortium 
does not contest the decision, with one exception. If the 
guild member joins another business, and the Consortium 
feels that trade secrets have been compromised, then the 
Consortium lobbies whatever local law exists in an effort to 
have the turncoat’s new business outlawed.
     Ty p e :      Business.
    Scale: 14 (continental/seafaring kingdom).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
5 or more ranks in Diplomacy or Appraise  +1 per 5 ranks
     in each skill
Can cast charm person                                                       +1
Can cast sending or travel by any means more than
100 miles in a day +2
Makes peaceful contact with a new town or potential 
customer base +1 per contact (max 3/year)
Successfully guards a caravan +1 per caravan guarded
Sells 1,000 gp of weapons 
or other goods +1 per sale (max. 1/month)
Discovers new iron, gem, or 
precious metal deposit +2 per discovery
Less than 5 ranks in Diplomacy or Appraise –2 per skill
Fails to deliver a caravan or message on time –1/day
Loses a shipment of goods –3/5,000 gp lost
Does not account for at least 10,000 gp of business 
per year (whether in direct sales, guard duty, or 
prospecting for ore or customers) –6
 Titles, Benefits, and Duties: As you rise through the 
ranks of the Consortium, you learn to increase your negotiat-
ing skills, and you gain access to great wealth.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Freelancer: The Consortium occasionally 
calls on you to help on specifi c jobs.
11– 2 0 Associate: +1 competency bonus on 
Diplomacy checks when speaking about 
business matters.
21–29                            Subguild Head: Placed in charge of one of 
the many subguilds and commanding the 
services of fi ve 4th-level experts (allot skill 
points as you like, for you can choose from 
the many clerks in the Consortium). Once 
per month, your experts must each make a 
DC 20 Appraise check and a DC 15 Gather 
Information check. If three or more fail the 
Appraise check, business is bad, and you 
lose 1 point from your affi liation score. If 
all fi ve fail the Gather Information check, 
you fail to anticipate and deter a kidnap and 
ransom attempt targeting you or your family, 
and an EL 10 band of rogues arrives to carry 
out the deed.
30 or higher Secretary of the Overguild: Can borrow up to 
30,000 gp in cash from guild coffers, but this 
debt must be repaid within one year.
 Executive Powers: Craft, gift, trade.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   168620_95374_Ch7.indd   1682/8/06   4:20:41 PM2/8/06   4:20:41 PM

169
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
CARAVAN OF SHADOWS
    Symbol: Once affi  liated, you receive a tattoo of a game 
token on the back of your left hand in a solemn ceremony. 
When other members see the tattoo, they’re more likely to 
talk to you and believe what you say.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: On the surface, the 
Caravan of Shadows is a prosperous halfl  ing clan. But as with 
many halfl ing affairs, there’s more going on beneath the 
surface. Halfl  ing characters with a connection to the Caravan 
of Shadows are part of a network of thieves, spies, and con 
artists that stretches across a wide swath of civilization.
     The Caravan of Shadows travels from city to city in a long 
wagon train, staying at each major settlement for a few days. 
The caravan’s bards, acrobats, and other entertainers hold a 
series of performances, and the clan’s merchants buy and 
sell spices and other valuable but easily portable goods. Less 
savory members of the caravan pick the pockets of the larger 
folk, commit burglaries on a nightly basis, or fl  eece the naïve 
in games of chance or shady business deals.
 Ty p e : Business (racial).
 Scale: 7 (city and outliers).
 Affi  liation Score Criteria: Only halfl  ings are eligible 
to join the caravan. Nonhalf lings are sometimes allowed 
to  travel  with  them—especially  on  dangerous  roads—but  
fellow travelers don’t get a glimpse of the inner workings of 
the caravan.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level  +1/2 PC’s level 
Rogue                                                                                 +2
Bard                                                                                    +1
10 or more ranks in Sleight of Hand +2
10 or more ranks in Perform +1
Help another caravan member elude law enforcement   +1
Steal or cheat others out of at least 10,000 gp, 
then donate proceeds to the caravan +1
 
 Titles, Benefits, and Duties: The reward for greater 
affi liation with the Caravan of Shadows is a keener talent 
for the skills that have the made the caravan so prosperous. 
And if the caravan is in town, you can sell the loot from your 
adventures to them at an advantageous rate.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–10                                Caravan Member: +2 racial bonus on Bluff, 
Gather Information, and Sleight of Hand 
checks. 
11–15 Shadow Pawn: Can sell jewelry, art, and 
magic items to the caravan masters for 60% 
of their purchase price. +2 circumstance 
bonus on attempts to influence the attitude 
of caravan members.
16–22                            Shadow Knight: Additional +2 racial bonus 
on all saving throws. +4 racial bonus on 
Bluff, Gather Information, and Sleight of 
Hand checks. +4 circumstance bonus on 
attempts to influence the attitude of caravan 
members.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
23–29 Shadow Rook: You can sell jewelry, art, and 
magic items to the caravan masters for 70% 
of their purchase price.
30 or higher Shadow Castle: +6 racial bonus on Bluff, 
Gather Information, and Sleight of Hand 
checks. +8 circumstance bonus on attempts 
to influence the attitude of caravan members.
 Executive Powers: Pariah, shadow war, trade.
CASTLE MAIRO
    Symbol: The symbol of Castle Mairo is the battered 
breastplate of Herridek I. In more intricate heraldic designs, 
the broken fl int hammers of troglodytes can be seen lying 
below the shield.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: Three centuries and 
one day after the Third Troglodytic Ruin razed the original 
Fort Mairo to the ground, Castle Mairo was raised in its place. 
Regdar had defeated Iathra, Pharaoh of the Reviled, and the 
oases on the edges of the desert were once again safe. Before 
leaving, Regdar helped his brother, Herridek II, to found a 
small keep on the border of the dunes.
    Life in the oasis can be harsh when the sandstorms roll 
through, but the presence of copper, platinum, and mithral 
in the surrounding hills and even the bubbling oasis itself 
provides ample reason for the castle’s continued existence.
 Members: Herridek II rules the castle wisely, and he 
recruits all manner of citizens to his nascent barony: men-at-
arms, certainly, but also wizards, bards, rangers, and skilled 
rogues. The castle is especially desperate for divine casters 
and healers.
     Herridek II is a benefi  cent monarch and allows individu-
als to enter and leave his domain at their leisure. In times 
of crisis—if a new pharaoh were to rise in the lands of the 
Reviled, for instance—all those nearby are drawn inside the 
castle walls and expected to aid in its defense.
     Ty p e : Government.
    Scale:    9 (regional/barony).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Base attack bonus +5 or higher +1
Base attack bonus +10 or higher* +2
5 or more ranks in Survival +1
Can cast cure spells 2nd level or higher +4
Explored the shafts of  +1 for each
the Raptor-Pharaohs  tomb shaft fully explored
Slew Raptor-Pharaoh mummy     +1/4 Hit Dice of mummy
Knew Regdar or Herridek I +4
Takes part in defense of the fort against raiders +4
Is an outlaw –2
Retreats in battle –2
Commits a crime within the barony –10
Is member of a thieves guild –10
* Overlaps (does not stack with) the modifier for a base 
attack bonus of +5 or higher.
 Titles, Benefits, and Duties: As you advance in the 
hierarchy  of  the  barony,  you  gain  access  to  its  riches  and  
620_95374_Ch7.indd   169620_95374_Ch7.indd   1692/8/06   4:20:48 PM2/8/06   4:20:48 PM

170
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
begin to enjoy the benefi  ts of nobility, while accepting the 
duties thereof.
     Once  you  attain  the  rank  of  Knight  Baronet,  you  are  
invested with authority in the castle. Herridek the Second 
often makes forays into the desert for weeks or months at a 
time, harassing the Reviled and making sure that they are 
not a threat to the Castle and its mines.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Free Citizen: Are a citizen of the barony but 
gain no special status.
11– 2 0 Hero: +2 circumstance bonus on Diplomacy 
checks involving other cirizens of the barony.
21–29                            Knight: Gain the patronage of Herridek II, 
which grants a +4 bonus on Diplomacy and 
Gather Information checks made within the 
barony.
30 or higher Knight Baronet: Command the services of 
an honor guard consisting of twelve 1st-level 
fighters, two 5th-level fighters, one 5th-level 
wizard, and two 7th-level halfling rangers 
mounted on giant eagles.
 Executive Powers: Law, raid, war.
THE CHALICE
    Symbol: The symbol of the Chalice is a ruby chalice with 
crossed ivory lightning bolts on the cup.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: The Chalice is an armed 
company dedicated to stamping out the infl  uence of devils, 
demons, yugoloths and other slavering fi  ends on the Material 
Plane. The paladin Arbinget Ivenay founded the Chalice a mil-
lennia ago with one goal: to recover the Chalice of Heironeous 
from Dispater’s Iron City of Dis. Aside from the members of 
the group’s Lightning Council, no one knows if the chalice 
was recovered or not, but regardless of the chalice’s fate, in 
the intervening ages the affi  liation’s purpose has broadened 
to ending the infl  uence of the Lower Planes in the world.
 Members: Many members of the Chalice are paladins, 
priests, and fi  ghters; many of these eventually take levels in 
the knight of the Chalice prestige class (see Complete Warrior). 
Mortality is high among the membership of this combative 
affi  liation, and as such the Chalice is always looking to induct 
new members of suffi  cient  piety.
    The Chalice is not a vengeful organization, and freely 
allows members to leave its ranks. If a member departs due to 
falling from paladinhood, fi  endish possession, or alignment 
change—or tries to covertly corrupt the Chalice from within 
after  suffering  one  of  these  fates—the  Lightning  Council  
dispatches an EL 14 exorcism squad (typically a 13th-level 
paladin and a 13th-level cleric of Olidammara) that is more 
inclined to smite fi  rst  and  ask  for  repentance  by  means  of  
speak with dead much later.
 Secrets: When you attain the rank of Lightning Coun-
cilor, the other councilors lead you somberly to the Eyrie 
of  Heironeous.  There,  among  the  lightning  rods  of  the  
order, under a clouding sky, they inform you of the true 
nature of the Chalice of Heironeous. What was stolen from 
Heironeous millennia ago—not by Dis, but by Hextor, who 
attempted to shirk responsibility for his deed (and to better 
secure his prize) by loaning the chalice to the Iron Lord of 
the Second—was not a powerful magic item, nor even an 
artifact. As revealed to Arbinget Ivenay by the solar Tomal 
on the eve of St. Vorgan’s Day 1,223 years ago, the Chalice of 
Heironeous is in fact the daughter of Heironeous, a young 
goddess-angel now held in durance v i le deep in Dispater ’s 
Iron Tower. Every day, the Lightning Councilors dream of 
rescuing her; every day, they come no closer.
     Ty p e :      Fighting company.
    Scale: 12 (multiregional/kingdom).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Base attack bonus +10 or higher  +1
Can cast divine spells +1
Knight of the Chalice prestige class +1 per two levels
Wields a holy avenger +8
Has slain a fi end with more than 9 HD +1 per fi end
Has written a treatise on slaying fiends +2
Successful mission on behalf 
of the Chalice +2 per mission
Successful mission on behalf of the 
Lightning Council +4 per mission
Neutral alignment –15
Evil alignment –25
Defeated by a fi end –4
Friends with a half-fiend, tiefling, or other tainted –10
 Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: As you advance within the 
ranks of the Chalice, you learn demon-fi ghting techniques 
and how to resist the temptations of fi  ends.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or less No affiliation.
4–10                                Initiate: The Chalice recognizes you as a 
potential ally or enemy in the struggle to 
eliminate fi ends from the Material Plane.
11–15                              Defender: You are inducted into 
membership, and can requisition a potion of 
protection from evil 1/we ek .
16–20                            Thunderer: Chalice priests cast up to 3rd-level 
cure spells for free (excluding component 
costs) when you visit their temple.
20 –24                            Scion of Heironeous: Chalice priests cast 
up to 4th-level spells for free (excluding 
component costs) when you visit their temple.
25–29                            Paragon of Heironeous: By taking a –5 penalty 
to your affi liation score, you can gain a raise 
dead spell from a Chalice priest. Fiends can 
make a Knowledge (the planes) check (DC 30 
minus your character level) to recognize you, 
and if they succeed, their frenzy grants them 
+2 on damage rolls when attacking you.
30 or higher     Lightning Councilor: Once per year, you can 
borrow for 1 week any magic weapon or 
armor with a value of 18,000 gp or less from 
the Chalice’s armory. While you do so, the 
affiliation takes a –1 penalty to its capital.
 Executive Powers: Crusade, inquisition, war.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   170620_95374_Ch7.indd   1702/8/06   4:20:54 PM2/8/06   4:20:54 PM

171
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
DARKSPIRE COLLEGE 
OF THAUN
    Symbol: The college’s symbol is three black 
stalactites, one larger than the other two, on a 
gold fi  eld.
Background,  Goals,  and  Dreams:  The  
Dark spire College’s campus is built into the 
sides of three enormous hanging stalactites 
tapering  down  from  the  vaulted  ceiling  of  
a colossal underground cavern. Piercer, the 
largest  stalactite,  extends  more  than  300  feet  
down from the ceiling and has a base with a 
radius of 150 feet. It houses laboratories and 
libraries  for  each  school  of  arcane  magic,  a  
concert hall, thirteen summoning chambers, 
two gymnasiums, the Desmodu Dormitory, 
and lecture halls. Each of the Fangs, the other 
two stalactites, is roughly two-thirds the size 
of the Piercer. They contain classrooms, stud-
ies, artists’ cupolae, and practice rooms. The 
northernmost Fang also features the Sunless 
Rose tavern and a warehouse. The warehouse 
stores goods in transit to and from the surface 
and other underground communities, and it 
sells surplus and goods gone unclaimed when 
a caravan doesn’t return. The warehouse has a 
25% chance to have any given Player’s Handbook 
item in stock and available at 150% of the price. 
The Piercer and the Fangs are connected by a 
network of rope bridges.
     Faculty  and  students  attend  Darkspire  to  
increase their arcane knowledge, and that is 
the stated goal of the organization. 
Enemies  and  Allies:  The  students,  fac-
ulty, and administration maintain friendly 
relationships with most of the other peaceful 
residents of Thaun (the underground cavern 
that hosts the college’s spires on a small part 
of its roof ). These peaceful residents include 
svirfneblin,  deep  dwarves,  two  nomadic  
tribes of myconids, and a small community 
of exiled drow. 
    The college is harassed by most drow, by an 
aboleth that lives in Thaun Lake, and by Cher-
ruk, a derro warlord who claims ownership of 
the caverns immediately above Thaun.
 Members:  The  College  holds  no  grudge  
against those who leave its faculty. Indeed, 
given the college’s location, it counts on los-
ing at least one faculty member per year to 
beasts, slavers, or an accidental fall from a 
rope bridge.
 Ty p e : College.
    Scale:    5 (city).
     Affiliation  Score  Criteria:  Joining  the  
Darkspire College is as simple as enrolling; 
however, to become a faculty member requires 
long study and arcane puissance.
The inverted towers of Thaun 
hide many secrets
Illus. by M. May
620_95374_Ch7.indd   171620_95374_Ch7.indd   1712/8/06   4:21:01 PM2/8/06   4:21:01 PM

172
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Has darkvision +2
10 or more ranks in Knowledge (arcana) +2
Has the Arcane Thesis feat +4 per feat
Can cast arcane spells 3rd level or higher +2
Can cast arcane spells 5th level or higher +4
Has a magic staff +4
Is an archmage or has a staff of power +8
Donates 1,000 gp (or more) magic item +2 per item,
to the Department of Crafting max 3 items/year
Is drow, derro, duergar, or drider –2
No ranks in Knowledge (arcana) –10
Can cast divine spells –2
Does not spend at least 1 month per year on campus –20
Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: As you advance in the col-
lege, you improve your Knowledge skills and gain access to 
magic items. You also earn a modest stipend for sharing your 
expertise with the college.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Correspondent Student: You can regularly 
correspond with the college while adventuring.
11–20                            Adjunct Researcher: +2 competence bonus on 
Knowledge skills while in the college’s libraries.
21–29                            Professor: When crafting a magic item, you 
can scavenge materials from the college—
spend only 90% of the normal gp cost to craft 
an item. Drow slavers and derro kidnappers 
recognize your value—5% chance per 
month that an EL 12 team of subterranean 
mercenaries comes to claim your bounty.
30 or higher     Regent: Can requisition any arcane scroll of 
750 gp or less from the college stores, up to 
three times per month. Must replace these 
scrolls with scrolls of equal value within 
one month of taking them.
Executive Powers: Craft, research, trade.
DR AGON ISLAND
    Symbol: The symbol of Dragon Island is a 
purple rampant dragon. The elder dragons chose 
purple as a compromise; it doesn’t correspond 
to any true dragon’s real color and thus 
represents dragonkind as a whole.
Background, Goals, and Dreams: 
A few miles off a remote stretch 
of coastland is Dragon Island, 
where humans soar over skies on 
draconic  steeds.  In  this  insular  
society, dragons and humans live 
in  concert,  with  dragons  supplying  
ancient wisdom and humans providing 
industry and vitality.
     Dragon Island can appear anywhere 
you like in your campaign world, and you 
can give it a more evocative name if you wish. 
The nature of the dragons it houses (metallic or chromatic) 
is deliberately undefi  ned. Depending on the dictates of your 
campaign, Dragon Island could be a bastion of hope or the 
nexus of a gathering evil.
     Members: Affi  liation members are human characters who 
grew up on Dragon Island, learning magic under the wing 
(literally) of draconic masters and even riding loyal dragons 
as steeds.
 Ty p e : Government (racial).
Scale: 12 (multiregional/kingdom).
 Affi  liation  Score  Criteria: Only humans qualify for this 
affi  liation because Dragon Island is an insular place with no 
elves, dwarves or other humanoids. Most grew up here, but 
you could also establish an affi  liation with Dragon Island if 
you spend years here as an adult.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level 
Speak Draconic +2
Sorcerer                                                                              +2
10 or more ranks in Ride +1
Donate 20,000 gp in treasure to the hoard 
of a Dragon Island dragon +1
Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties:  You’l l  
learn from your draconic teachers, but 
the most thrilling reward of affi  liation  
with Dragon Island is the chance to 
take wing with a friendly dragon as 
your  fl ying steed. Doing so isn’t easy; 
raising your affi  liation score on Dragon 
Island is diffi  cult.
 There are many more humans than 
dragons on Dragon 
Island, and the 
dragons  often  
have  better  
things  to  
On Dragon Island, humans and dragons live together in harmony
Illus. by D. Hudnut
620_95374_Ch7.indd   172620_95374_Ch7.indd   1722/8/06   4:21:11 PM2/8/06   4:21:11 PM

173
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
do than fl  y around with humans on their backs. Those who 
become dragonspeakers imbibe a ritual draught contain-
ing dragon blood; this liquid lengthens the human life span 
and makes the dragons more likely to regard you as a suit-
able rider. But only the best dragonspeakers are offered the 
ritual that turns them into dragonriders, who are able to 
command a dragon for as long as it takes a moon to wax and 
then wane into nothingness. The greatest heroes of Dragon 
Island mystically bond with their mounts, creating an on-
going relationship between willing steed and rider.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower  Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–10                                Dragon Island Native: +2 circumstance 
bonus on attempts to infl uence the attitude 
of Dragon Island residents. Your age 
categories (see page 109 of the Player’s 
Handbook) become twice as long, although 
you don’t revert to a younger age category.
11–15                              Dragonspeaker: +4 bonus on saving throws 
against a dragon’s frightful presence. +2 
racial bonus on Knowledge (arcana) and 
Knowledge (history) checks.
15–22                            Dragonrider: +4 racial bonus on Ride checks 
when riding a dragon.
23–29                            Dragonknight: If you take the Leadership 
feat, you can have a dragon cohort.
30 or higher     Dragonmaster: +8 racial bonus on 
Ride checks when riding a dragon. +8 
circumstance bonus on attempts to influence 
the attitude of Dragon Island residents. 
Immune to the frightful presence 
of dragons. Your age categories 
(see page 109 of the Player’s 
Handbook) become four times as 
long, although you don’t revert to 
a younger age category.
Executive Powers: Holiday, law, mint, war.
ELVES OF THE HIGH FOREST
    Symbol: A cluster of acorns is the symbol of the Elves 
of the High Forest. Their jewelry often uses this motif, and 
they use the real thing—actual clusters of acorns—as subtle 
trail markers within the High Forest. 
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: The Elves of the 
High Forest live in a typical elf community: a series of 
treetop villages and small towns that together form 
a network to keep their forest safe and thriving. 
 Ty p e : Tribe (racial).
Scale: 6 (city).
 Affi  liation  Score  Criteria: To gain affi  liation  
with the Elves of the High Forest, you need only be 
an elf or half-elf. The elves have many non-elf friends 
in the forest, but only those with elf blood can partake 
in  the  privileged  Hunt  of  the  Full  Moon.  You  don’t  
need to grow up among the Elves of the High Forest; 
you  can  be  from  a  far-off  elf  community,  and  you’ll  
still gain affi  liation with these elves normally.
    The Elves of the High Forest have a semi communal life-
st yle, so they favor characters w ith ski l ls or class abi l ites that 
make a woodland lifestyle easier. The fastest way to gain status 
within the Elves of the High Forest is to perform missions 
on  their  behalf.  The  elves  particularly  favor  missions  that  
protect the forest as a whole from interlopers—from human 
woodcutters to drow raiders.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Druid or ranger +1
10 or more ranks in Knowledge (nature) or 
Profession (herbalist) +2
Each successful mission +2
Each successful forest defense mission* +4
* Overlaps (does not stack with) the “each successful 
mission” bonus.
Titles, Benefits, and Duties: The Elves of the High 
Forest offer specialized training in woodcraft for those 
they favor.
    Those who reach a new level of status within the Elves 
of the High Forest attain the new benefi ts after attending 
the Hunt of the Full Moon—a combination night-hunt and 
ritual. The greatest hunters among the elves take you on an 
all-night hunt for elusive game. The target is traditionally 
a half-fey white stag, but sometimes the elves hunt more 
dangerous quarry by necessity or for variety. During the 
night, they teach you specialized techniques in perception, 
stealth, and moving through the wilderness. Some say the 
hunters leave the Material Plane entirely and wind up hunt-
ing mystical game among the fey of Arborea. You’ll return 
in the morning exhausted, but with the sharper perceptions 
and peerless camoufl  age of the greatest elf hunters.
The Elves of the High Forest take part in the Hunt of the Full Moon
Illus. by H. Lyon
620_95374_Ch7.indd   173620_95374_Ch7.indd   1732/8/06   4:21:21 PM2/8/06   4:21:21 PM

174
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower  Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–10                                Friend of the High Forest: +2 circumstance 
bonus on attempts to infl uence the attitude 
of High Forest elves.
11–15                              Guardian of the Branch: +4 racial bonus on 
Listen, Search, and Spot checks.
16–22                            Guardian of the Trunk: +4 racial bonus on 
Hide and Move Silently checks performed 
outdoors. +4 circumstance bonus on 
attempts to infl uence the attitude of High 
Forest elves.
23–29                            Guardian of the Root: +8 racial bonus 
on Listen, Search, and Spot checks, and 
the woodland stride ability (PH 48). 
+8 circumstance bonus on attempts to 
influence the attitude of High Forest elves.
30 or higher     Guardian of the Forest’s Heart: +2 effective 
caster level to all druid and ranger spells 
when casting spells within the boundaries of 
the High Forest.
Executive Powers: Craft, harvest, plague.
THE GOLDEN HELM GUILD
    Symbol: A golden helm is the symbol of the guild, natu-
rally. Working in their smithies and forges, the gnomes often 
wear yellow skullcaps to indicate their affi  liation.
Background,  Goals,  and  Dreams:  The  Golden  Helm  
Guild is a network of expert master crafters that spans dozens 
of gnome communities, making fi ne armor, weapons, and 
other  gear  for  the  greatest  heroes  of  the  gnomes.  But  the  
Golden Helm is no mere blacksmithing guild. It focuses on 
creating rare items invested with potent magic, each one a 
testament to its maker’s skill and power.
     Missions on behal f of the G olden Hel m Gui ld of ten involve 
securing rare ores or fi nding other special ingredients that 
the guild can use in its most potent creations.
     The guild often commissions its most talented members 
to make magic weapons, armor, or other gear to sell or give 
to a gnome-allied war effort. Each item you make on the 
guild’s behalf worth at least 10,000 gp earns you +1 to your 
affi liation score. You can earn this bonus multiple times, 
but only if the Golden Helm Guild commissions the items 
ahead of time.
 Ty p e : Business (racial).
Scale: 10 (regional/march).
 Affi  liation  Score  Criteria: Guild membership is open 
only to gnomes, but anyone who can swing a hammer is 
welcome to sign up for an apprenticeship. Unless you have 
some talent for cra fting either mundane or magic items, you 
won’t derive any benefi  t from your affi  liation.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level 
10 or more ranks in at least one Craft skill +2
10 or more ranks in a second Craft skill +2
20 or more ranks in at least one Craft skill +4
Per item creation feat* +1
Each successful mission +1
Per magic item worth at least 
10,000 gp made for guild +1
* Does not include the item creation feat gained by 
someone who becomes a Golden Helm Master (see 
below).
 Titles, Benefi  ts,  and  Duties: When you’ve ear ned enough 
affi liation to attain new benefi ts, you need only apply for a 
promotion at the nearest Golden Helm chapterhouse, which 
exists in any gnome community of large town size or larger. 
After a series of examinations, the guild will award you the 
new rank and hold a lavish feast in your honor. 
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower  Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–10                                Golden Helm Apprentice: +2 racial bonus on 
Appraise checks relating to stone or metal 
objects. +4 racial bonus on any one Craft skill.
11–15                              Golden Helm Journeyman: +6 racial bonus 
on Appraise checks relating to stone or 
metal objects. +6 racial bonus on the Craft 
skill you chose when you were a journeyman, 
and a +4 racial bonus on another Craft skill.
15–22                            Golden Helm Master: Gain Craft Magic 
Arms and Armor as a bonus feat. You can 
craft magic arms and armor as if you had a 
caster level equal to 1/2 your Hit Dice. This 
ability does not allow you to meet any other 
prerequisites of crafting a magic item.
23–29                            Golden Helm Grandmaster: Craft magic 
arms and armor as if you had a caster level 
equal to your Hit Dice.
The gnomes of the Golden Helm Guild make fi 
ne we
apons and armor—
and they’re capable of using them
Illus. by E. Widermann
620_95374_Ch7.indd   174620_95374_Ch7.indd   1742/8/06   4:21:30 PM2/8/06   4:21:30 PM

175
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
30 or higher     Golden Helm Exalted: Spend 10% fewer 
experience points than normal when crafting 
a magic item.
 Executive Powers: Craft, gift, trade.
THE LAND OF HONOR
    Symbol: The Land of Honor doesn’t have a nationwide 
symbol. Each feudal lordship has its own colorful heraldry, 
most using abstract decorations rather than real-world sym-
bols like animals or words.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: Humans from this 
land live in a society guided by feudal lords who often war 
against one another. But the wars are largely fought by a 
caste of noble soldiers who regard battle as an opportunity 
to demonstrate their bravery and adherence to a rigid code 
of honor. Rather than draw inspiration from medieval and 
Renaissance Europe, this land hearkens back to feudal Japan 
and the Age of Samurai.
    In your own game, the Land of Honor might be its own 
nation-state, or perhaps it remains a vague and exotic place 
beyond the periphery of the campaign map. Give it whatever 
name you like.
     Your human character can be a traveler or an exile from 
the Land of Honor. If you want to retain your unique cult ural 
identity, consider an affi  liation with others from your land. 
Perhaps colonies or communities of exiles exist beyond the 
borders of the Land of Honor, or perhaps travel back and 
forth is suffi  ciently easy that you can periodically return to 
the land of your birth.
     If you’re wielding executive powers, you’re either one of 
the feudal lords or the power behind the lord’s throne. Your 
concer ns var y as w idely as those of any real-world r uler; you 
might care about the welfare of your subjects, or you might 
care only about games of power or living a life of wealth 
and leisure. 
 Ty p e : Government (racial).
 Scale: 15 (continental/empire).
 Affi  liation  Score  Criteria:  Unless  one  is  human  and  
born  in  the  Land  of  Honor,  a  character  is  accepted  in  this  
affi  liation only under extraordinary circumstances. 
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level 
Fighter or monk +2
5 or more ranks in Diplomacy +1
10 or more ranks in Diplomacy +2
Defeat worthy foe in honorable duel +1
Perform mission at lord’s request    +2 (and –4 if you fail)
 Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: As you gain a f fi  liation  with  
the Land of Honor, your feudal lord will reward you with a 
ceremonial—but very functional—katana. A katana is sta-
tistically identical to a bastard sword. Your willingless to live 
and die by your honor code becomes increasingly apparent 
from your bearing, and many foes will shamefacedly avoid 
a duel with you.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower  Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–10                                Citizen of Land of Honor: +2 circumstance 
bonus on attempts to infl uence the attitude 
of other citizens of the Land of Honor. Your 
lord gives you a masterwork katana.
11–15                              Fearless One: +2 racial bonus on Intimidate 
checks. Gain Knowledge (nobility and royalty) 
as a class skill, regardless of your class.
16–22                            Honorable One: +4 racial bonus on 
Intimidate checks. +4 circumstance bonus 
on attempts to infl uence the attitude of 
citizens of the Land of Honor. Gain Quick 
Draw feat when drawing your katana.
23–29                            Selfless One: +6 racial bonus on Intimidate 
checks. +8 circumstance bonus on attempts 
to influence the attitude of citizens of the Land 
of Honor. +4 bonus on attack rolls made to 
confirm a critical hit with your katana.
30 or higher     Perfected One: Gain damage reduction 
1/– when you wield your katana.
 Executive Powers: Gift, law, war.
MER ATA KON
     Symbol: There is no symbol for the Merata Kon as a whole. 
Most travelers recognize a Merata clan by its krenshar-hide 
tents and the smoke puffs that rise on the horizon when a 
Merata scout or companion band signals.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: The Merata Kon is a 
network of barbarian clans, sweeping nomadically from the 
coastal plains to the high scrub forest, living off wandering 
herds, seasonal vegetation, and ransomed travelers. Some 
tribes of the Merata Kon allow themselves to be hired as 
mercenaries, making raids on borderland baileys, but many 
would-be patrons shy away from these tribes because both 
its savagery and geographical uncertainty make it somewhat 
unreliable. Nonetheless, the people of the Kon are a powerful 
force due to their numbers and ferocity.
    In the spring of each year, all the Merata clans gather in 
one place for an Althing, where horses are traded, daughters 
are  wed,  and  alliances  are  fi  xed.  Occasionally,  in  times  of  
need, a Chief of Chiefs is selected, but most years there is no 
higher authority than the chiefs of the individual clans.
 Enemies and Allies: The clans are constantly in a state 
of tension with the civilized city-states and kingdoms whose 
frontier lands and territories they drift over seasonally, 
ignoring political borders like rain or wind or any other 
force of nature.
 Members: The tribe consists mostly of half-orcs, humans, 
and disaffected half-elves who fi  nd much i n common w it h t he 
natural and alienated lifestyle of the tribe. There are known 
to be Merata clerics, but there are virtually no arcane casters 
outside of a few skald bard/barbarians. 
     The var ied Merata clans have no pol itical arg ument against 
former members, but most clan chiefs take desertion person-
ally. In most cases, a Merata who leaves his clan is disowned 
and shunned forevermore.
     Ty p e : Tribe.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   175620_95374_Ch7.indd   1752/8/06   4:21:38 PM2/8/06   4:21:38 PM

176
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
    Scale:    13 (multiregional/kingdom and vassal states).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Base attack bonus +5 or higher +1
Base attack bonus +10 or higher* +2
5 or more ranks in Survival +1
10 or more ranks in Survival +2
Trophy Hunter feat +1
Can cast control weather +3
Defeat animal or magical beast
of your level or higher one-on-one +1/4 creature’s HD
Defeat a clan champion one-on-one +2 per win
No ranks in Survival –2
Has lived in city –2
Does not accept a  –6, and cannot improve affiliation 
challenge to combat score until challenge is accepted
Member of a civilized affiliation –4 per affiliation
* Overlaps (does not stack with) the modifier for a base 
attack bonus of +5 or higher.
 Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: As you learn the ways of the 
Merata, you learn to make these smoke signals yourself as you 
increase your survival skills and become closer to nature.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Lowborn: The Merata Kon hold less 
contempt for you than for most.
11–20                            Setaf Kon: +2 competence bonus on 
Diplomacy checks involving your clanmates 
and a +2 competency bonus on Survival 
checks made when traveling with clanmates.
21–29                            Trebor Kon : Become a subchief and have a 
3rd-level adept to assist you. By a system 
of bonfi res and smoke, you can transmit 
signals 200 miles across the Stalking Plains 
in 1d2 days.
30 or higher     Clan Chief: You are accompanied by four 
chief’s men (6th-level barbarians), and your 
counsel is a 4th-level cleric/4th-level bard.
 Executive Powers: Harvest, raid, terrorize.
THE ONE AND THE FIVE
    Symbol: The symbol of the One and the Five is six black, 
hooded fi  gures on a violet starburst fi  eld.  
 Background,  Goals,  and  Dreams: A secret ring of six 
wizards and sorcerers is at the heart of this cabal. Arcane 
casters vexed by a lack of resources fi  nd this group’s support 
exceptionally useful for purchasing spellbooks, researching 
new spells, and perfecting metamagic techniques.
 Enemies and Allies: The cabal has strained relations with 
most other organizations. Its secretive core, the six wizards 
and sorcerers known as the titular One and the Five, frustrate 
the attempts of spy rings and thieves guilds to penetrate and 
gather information, while their subsidization of spell books, 
research, and material components irks arcane colleges and 
many business guilds.
 Members: Most of the members are human, but the One 
and  the  Five  welcome  all  to  their  cabal,  and  in  addition  to  
half-orcs, dwarves, and gnomes, two centaurs and one gyno-
sphinx are known to be associated with the affi  liation.
     No one knows what happens if you try to leave the One 
and the Five. For some reason, no one ever has—or at least, 
no one is talking about it.
 Secrets: Once  you  reach  an  affi  liation  score  of  30,  you  
must defeat one of the current One and Five in a mortal spell 
duel. After killing your opponent, you are inducted into the 
heart of the cabal, where you learn that the order is devoted 
to Vecna, and that the One represents his Eye, and the Five 
represent the fi  ngers of his severed hand.
     You need not worry about converting to worship of Vecna 
at this point—when you fi  rst attained an affi  liation score of 
25 or higher and the subtle wooings of the inner cabal did not 
persuade you to convert to the service of the Maimed Lord, 
EL 14 assault squads of summoned monsters and golems are 
sent to kill you before you learn the cabal’s secret.
     Ty p e : Cabal.
    Scale: 10 (regional/march).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
5 or more ranks in Knowledge (arcana) +1
Can prepare arcane spells +1
Can cast arcane spells of 3rd level or higher +1
Can cast divination spells of 5th level or higher +2
Has over 2,500 gp in magic items +1
Donates magic item valued at 1,000 gp
or more to the cabal +1 per item, max six/year
Shares 5th-level or higher-level spell with other 
wizards at cabal Grand Convocation, held twice/year    +2
Completes mission for the leaders of the
cabal, the One and the Five +2 per mission
Can cast divine spells –6
Divulges identities of members or
other secrets of the cabal –4
Is known to investigate  –10, and an EL 12 coterie of
the identities or the nature sorcerer wraiths is sent
of the One and the Five to dissuade or dispose of you
Is a member of a spy ring –6
 Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: As you advance in the cabal, your 
knowledge of the arcane increases. You also gain access to spells 
and discounted components, paraphernalia, and research.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Of the Many: The cabal is aware of your 
presence and judging you.
11–20                            Of the Mind: When you gain a wizard level, 
automatically learn three spells rather than 
two.
21–29                            Of the Body: When you craft a magic item, 
pay only 90% the gp cost.
30 or higher     Of the One and the Five: Three times per 
year, you can borrow any wondrous item in 
the Dungeon Master’s Guide of 10,000 gp 
value or less for up to 1 week. You may not 
borrow a charged item in this manner.
 Executive Powers: Craft, research, shadow war.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   176620_95374_Ch7.indd   1762/8/06   4:21:44 PM2/8/06   4:21:44 PM

177
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
RESTENFORD GUILD OF INSURERS, 
SOLICITORS, AND BEGGARS
    Symbol: The symbol of the guild is a hand placing a gold 
piece into a beggar’s uplifted cup.
Background, Goals, and Dreams: The Guild of Insur-
ers, Solicitors, and Beggars exists for the aggrandizement 
of  its  members.  This  legitimate  businessman’s  guild  is  
run by Eyeless Errol, a sightless dwarf who spends much 
of his time on a chair in the guildhouse listening to his 
subordinates report. Eyeless Errol dresses neatly, always 
matching the color of kerchief that winds around his eye-
less sockets to the color of his pants, and he smiles with 
distant awareness.
     Enemies and Allies: This affi  liation enjoys comfortable 
relations with the Restenford Assassins Guild and the worker 
guilds of the city (including the Sewerworkers and the Chim-
ney Sweeps), walking a fi  ne line between respectability and 
ruthless underworld effi  ciency.
     Members: Most members are rogues, fighters, or arcane 
casters, with a few priests of Olidammara rounding out 
the roster. 
     The guild is highly vengeful. An EL 12 hit squad (typically 
two 8th-level fi  ghters and two 8th-level rogues) is dispatched 
to squelch any member who attempts to leave the guild 
without Errol’s express permission.
    Secrets: Behind the façade of an honest businessman and 
a dandifi ed hands-off owner, Eyeless Errol runs his guild 
according to best practices, using double-entry accounting 
and double-team extortion, and he is very hands-on despite 
being eyes-off. Some whisper that he is, in fact, not blind at 
all, but is simply a polymorphed dragon with blindsense; 
others claim he is a mindspy doppelganger who sees through 
the eyes of his victims, watching himself as he attacks. No 
one ever really expects to unseat Eyeless Errol, but many 
aspire to become the Insurance Boss, the Chief Solicitor, or 
the Beggarmaster. 
     After becoming Insurance Boss, Chief Solicitor, or Beggar-
master, you must deal with regular assassination attempts. 
Either  an  ambitious  underling  or  Eyeless  Errol  himself,  
wary of your own ambition, attempts to rub you out. If you 
succeed on a DC 30 Gather Information check, you learn 
of the plot and do not have to face an assassination attempt 
that month. If you fail to uncover the plot, you must either 
succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save, with failure indicating 
you have been assassinated, or play out the attack with your 
DM’s help (the assassin typically has a CR of your level 
minus 3).
     Ty p e :      Thieves guild.
    Scale: 6 (city).
Affiliation  Score  Criteria: To join, you must be a 
probationary footpad for some months, while the guild 
surveys your work. If you are sufficiently skilled, the guild 
invites you to run its gauntlet, a maze of mechanical and 
magic traps (and, according to some, an otyugh assassin 
retained by the guild to challenge overconfident would-
be initiates).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
10 or more ranks in Hide, Sleight of Hand,
Forgery, Disguise, or Open Lock  +2 per skill
Sneak attack +3d6 or higher +2
Runs the gauntlet in initiation +4
Spends one day per week appraising for
the guild (requires 10 ranks in Appraise) +1
Performs a heist or swindle for the guild 
that nets 1,000 gp or more +1
Spends time in the City Watch gaol +1
Tips off the guild about incoming City Watch raid +2
Has no ranks in Hide, Sleight of Hand,
Forgery, Disguise, or Open Lock –2 per skill
Participates in a nonguild job, first time    –8, and an EL 8 
    team of thugs is 
    dispatched to rough you up
Participates in a nonguild job, second time –15, and an 
    EL 12 team of rogues is 
    dispatched to maim or kill you
Steals from someone under the guild’s protection –6
Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: As you advance through 
the guild’s ranks, you improve your skills as a rogue and gain 
access to equipment that will help you perform cons, heists, 
rackets, and shakedowns for the guild. You also become the 
benefi  ciary of the guild’s skill at procuring lucre.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Probationary Footpad: Your jobs are 
sanctioned so you do not incur the affiliation 
score penalty for an out-of-guild job.
Eyeless Errol listens to a suggestion 
fo  r t
he Restenford Guild’s next job
Illus. by S. Ellis
620_95374_Ch7.indd   177620_95374_Ch7.indd   1772/8/06   4:21:51 PM2/8/06   4:21:51 PM

178
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
11–15                              Hood: You must run the gauntlet and be 
initiated. If you survive, you gain an income of 
200 gp/month. you must purchase equipment 
only from the guild, which maintains supply 
houses selling everything in the Player’s 
Handbook and items of 1,000 gp value or 
less from the Dungeon Master’s Guide.
16–22                            Bravo: In the city, +4 insight bonus on 
Hide and Move Silently checks and +2 
circumstance bonus on Sleight of Hand 
checks. The City Watch recognizes you if its 
Spot check beats your opposed Disguise 
check and attacks on sight. 
23–29                            Made Man: You can fence up to 3,000 gp 
of items for 90% market value each month. 
Income of 400 gp/month to spend at guild 
supply houses as above. Travel with impunity 
through the Sewerworkers Union’s sewers 
and the Chimney Sweeps’ rooftops.
30 or higher     Insurance Boss, Chief Solicitor, or Beggar-
master: +6 bonus on Gather Information 
and Intimidate checks in the city. You can 
borrow any one of the following from guild 
coffers for 1 week at a time: a cloak of 
elvenkind, boots of elvenkind, or any wand 
described in the Dungeon Master’s Guide. 
The City Watch considers you untouchable 
and no longer attacks on sight. Must make 
a DC 20 Diplomacy check each week or be 
forced to pay 100 gp in bribes and kickbacks. 
Must fight off regular assassination attempts.
 Executive Powers: Pariah, plunder, shadow war.
RESTENFORD 
SEWERWORKERS GUILD
    Symbol: The symbol of the Sewerworkers Guild is a styl-
ized image of the guildmaster: a square with a circle in it, 
representing Smiling Gordin and the head it contorts into a 
grinning rictus when communicating.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: Rat runners, ooze 
masters, subterranean tinkers, exterminators, conjurors and 
abjurers of fi lth—the members of the Sewerworkers Guild 
are  unnoticed  by  most  and  unthanked  by  all.  The  guild  is  
responsible for the operation of the city’s vast subterranean 
t unnel net work. Repair work and ex ter mination occupy much 
of the guild members’ time, but these menial tasks only serve 
to mask the guild’s true nature.
     The guild’s leader is Smiling Gordin, a miraculously awakened 
gelatinous cube, originally brought into the sewers because of 
its ability to scour a passageway clean simply by oozing through 
it. The origin of Gordin’s intelligence is unknown, but the 
quality of that intelligence is unquestioned. Communicating 
by gelatinous convulsions that manipulate the vocal cords of 
various heads absorbed into his body and not yet dissolved 
(the city is a violent place, and there is no shortage of heads 
for Gordin), Gordin has built the Sewerworkers Guild into 
one of the most powerful spy rings in the region. 
 Enemies and Allies: Utilizing their near-invisible status 
and all-city access to the fullest, Gordin and the sewer workers 
maintain good relations with the aboveground Guild of Insur-
ers, Solicitors, and Beggars (thieves guild) and often collaborate 
with that guild on missions.
 Members: Not surprisingly, most members of the Sewer-
workers are rogues, but a fair number are arcane casters, and 
some who appear to be ooze masters are whispered to be 
priests of Juiblex.
     The  Sewerworkers  cannot  allow  anyone  to  leave  their  
ranks. The knowledge gained by the spies is valuable, and the 
tunnel crawlers are loath to risk letting it get away for free, 
but the real threat is one of exposure. Smiling Gordin simply 
cannot  allow  anyone  to  learn  of  the  spy  ring’s  existence.  
Anyone leaving the ranks soon comes face to face with an 
EL 14 strike team lead by an otyugh assassin.
 Secrets: By the time you become Guild Boss, you learn that 
Smiling Gordin has become fi  xated on learning why it was chosen 
for intelligence. While it pursues that goal (and toward that end 
it might ask you to complete advent ures that it cannot), G ordin 
is content to become the Guild Grandfather, retaining ultimate 
veto power but relinquishing day-to-day control to you.
     Ty p e :      Spy ring.
    Scale:    6 (city).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Is deformed or maimed +1
5 or more ranks in Hide or Disguise +1 per skill
Can cast divination spells of 3rd level or higher +6
Sneak attack +2d6 or higher +2
Brings back sample of ooze, mold, or +1 per sample
slime to study
Completes a mission for the guild +4 per mission
Lives in sewers +4
Is double agent with another spy ring +6
Has no ranks in Hide, Disguise, Bluff,
Spot, Listen, or Sense Motive  –2 per skill
Is followed by City Watch or a member
of a rival affiliation into the tunnels –2
Is visibly shocked by Smiling Gordin’s appearance 
(one time only, DC 15 Bluff check on fi rst meeting) –4
Fails a mission for the Sewerworkers –6
 Titles, Benefits, and Duties: As you advance in the 
Sewer    workers’  Guild,  you  improve  your  spying  and  
information-gathering skills and learn to use the city tun-
nels to your advantage.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Squatter: The Sewerworkers allow you to 
squat at night in the tunnels.
11–20                            Rat Runner: +2 competence bonus on 
Gather Information checks in the city.
21–29                            Ooze Master: +2 circumstance bonus on 
Hide or Move Silently checks in the sewers.
30 or higher     Guild Father: Reroll a failed Spot or Listen 
check 3/day. +1 resistance bonus on saves 
against disease.
 Executive Powers: Assassinate, pariah, research.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   178620_95374_Ch7.indd   1782/8/06   4:21:59 PM2/8/06   4:21:59 PM

179
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
SHARULHENSA, 
THE ALABASTER TOWERS
     Symbol: Sharulhensa has no particular symbol, but many 
of the buildings within the neighborhood have fonts and 
fountains incorporated into their design—a architectural 
nod to the magic pools.
Background, Goals, and Dreams: Sharulhensa is a half-
elf enclave built within the walls of a human metropolis. 
Raised on the ruins of an ancient elf empire, the enclave 
holds onto its magical heritage even as other cultures have 
supplanted elves as the dominant humanoids across the 
land. The half-elves of Sharulhensa remember the mighty 
magic of their forebears, and they pass along ancient tradi-
tions to the new generation in an effort to connect their 
dual heritage.
    Secrets:  Throughout  the  city  of  Sharulhensa  are  sacred  
pools believed to hold the spirits of departed half-elves in a 
quiescent state. When a half-elf drinks of these waters, he 
or she gains a measure of magical power and a sense of the 
eldritch tapestry that weaves together residents of Sharul-
hensa, no matter how far they roam. The enclave’s elders 
keep the locations of the sacred pools a secret even from the 
ordinary residents of Sharulhensa, so the only way to get 
access to the pools is by garnering favor with Sharulhensa’s 
elders—earning affi  liation, in other words.
     The movers and shakers within Sharulhensa have intense 
academic rivalries with each other as they vie to recapture 
more of their elven heritage.
Ty p e : College (racial).
Scale: 2 (neighborhoods).
Affi  liation  Score  Criteria: Only hal f-elves are el igible to 
join this affi  liation. Sharulhensa residents regard full-blooded 
elves  as  lacking  suffi  cient  vitality  and  energy  to  guard  the  
heritage of their ancient forebears.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Wizard                                                                                +2
Other spellcaster +1
10 or more ranks in Knowledge (arcana) +2
Each successful mission +1
Recovers a magic item worth 30,000 gp or more +2
Recovers a spellbook with at least 7th-level spells +1
Titles, Benefits, and Duties: Sharulhensa sometimes 
needs adventurers to undertake missions on its behalf. If you 
complete such an adventure successfully, you can increase 
your affi liation score with the half-elf enclave. But moreso 
than the standard “Stop the orc horde marching toward the 
city” mission, recovering the elves’ ancient heritage earns 
favor with Sharulhensa’s elders—even if you’re recovering 
that heritage from the elves themselves. In particular, you can 
improve your status with Sharulhensa if you retrieve major 
magic items crafted by the elves long ago and grimoires with 
high-level arcane spells. Not any magic sword or spellbook 
will do, however—Sharulhensa is interested only in items 
steeped in elven history. 
     The reward of Sharulhensa affi  lation—access to the magic 
pools—is great, but earning affi  liation with Sharulhensa is 
more diffi  cult than most other racial a f fi  liations. Those who 
persevere find their ability to wield magic, especially the 
subtle enchantments of the elves, vastly improved.
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower  Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–14                                Citizen of Sharulhensa: +2 circumstance 
bonus on attempts to infl uence the attitude 
of Sharulhensa half-elves.
15–22                            Pool of the Inscrutable: +1 to the DC of 
saving throws against your enchantment 
spells and spell-like abilities.
23–29                            Pool of Infl uence: +8 circumstance bonus 
on attempts to infl uence the attitude of 
Sharulhensa half-elves.
30 or higher     Pool of the Endless: Gain detect magic as a 
spell-like ability usable at will (caster level 
equal to your Hit Dice).
Executive Powers: Gift, research, trade. 
The half-elves of Sharulhensa are dedicated 
to preserving ancient lore
Illus. by C. Frank
620_95374_Ch7.indd   179620_95374_Ch7.indd   1792/8/06   4:22:06 PM2/8/06   4:22:06 PM

180
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
SUN FANE
     Symbol: The symbol of the Sun Fane is the same as that of 
Pelor: a shining sun.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: The Sun Fane is a pow-
erful Pelorite temple. A cyclopean golden dome, representing 
the sun, rests atop colossal blue marble walls, representing 
the sky, and both are supported by golden fl ying buttresses, 
completing the tableau by representing the sun’s rays shining 
down on the earth.
     The goal of the temple is to witness for Pelor and spread the 
glory of its merciful diety. All members of the temple turn a 
stern eye on those who disparage Pelor as a “part-time god” 
who only works half the day.
    The prelates, canons, and bishops of the Sun Fane are all 
ardent in their worship of Pelor, but this does not stop them 
from engaging in heated internal politics. The One Sun is 
the archcanon of the temple, and when a leader steps down 
or passes away into the sun’s brilliant radiance, the infi ghting 
is fi  erce.  
 Members: Most of the Sun Fane’s members are clerics, 
and only a cleric can rise to become the One Sun. Paladins, 
rogue scholars, and a few druids also climb the ecclesiastical 
ladder of the Sun Fane’s hierarchy. 
     In keeping with its merciful teachings, the Sun Fane holds 
no grudge against those who leave its ranks. The temple is 
notoriously persistent, however, in trying to win back souls, 
and those who leave the Sun Fane hierarchy can expect many 
old friends to come calling with news of brilliant grace and 
blessed light.
     Ty p e : Temple.
    Scale: 12 (kingdom).
 Affi  liation Score Criteria: The Sun Fane is open only to 
those of non-evil alignment.
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er 
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
5 or more ranks in Heal +1
Can cast divine spells of 3rd level or higher +1
Can cast divine spells of 5th level or higher* +2
Undertakes missionary voyage +1 per voyage
Converts creature to Pelor’s faith (convert
must remain a believer) +1 per convert
Raises or resurrects an innocent soul with own funds +2
Donates 15% or more of treasure to Sun Fane +2
Cannot cast divine spells –2
Sells spells to neutral creature –2
Sells spells to evil creature for nonevil purpose –6
Acts against alignment –10 ,and cannot improve
      affiliation   score   until
      undergoing   atonement
* Overlaps (does not stack with) the bonus for casting 
divine spells of 3rd level or higher.
 Titles, Benefits, and Duties: As you advance in the 
ranks of the Pelorite priesthood, you learn to win converts 
to your faith, to spread the healing light of your faith, and to 
scourge the undead (along with, some would say, rivals for 
the archbishopric).
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Lay Worshiper: The Sun Fane welcomes you 
as a faithful member of the congregation.
11–20                            Ordained: +2 competence bonus on 
Knowledge (religion) checks when 
consulting the Sun Fane’s library.
21–29                            Canon: +1 competence bonus on Diplomacy 
checks.
30 or higher     Archbishop: The Sun Fane brooch, vestment 
of your office (does not take up space on 
the body) grants you a +2 bonus on turning 
checks.
 Executive Powers: Crusade, excommunicate, holiday.
THE THUNDER SAIL ARGOSY
    Symbol: The symbol of the Argosy is emblazoned on the 
sails of all three brigantines: a gold lightning bolt on sable.
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: The gentle heaving of 
the deck underfoot slows, then stops. The gulls overhead quiet, 
and the only sound is the rhythmic lapping of the suddenly 
becalmed salt sea at the hull. A peal of thunder cracks over the 
horizon, and clouds come scudding across the sky only a few 
knots slower than the bolt-on-sable Thunder Sails.
     Captain  Jonas  Jakes  commands  an  outlaw  fl  eet  of  three  
brigantines: the Rain Hawk, the Red Lightning, and the fl  agship  
Maelstrom Aria. Few of the current pirates in his fl  eet  were  
w ith him when he star ted, and those few who have been in his 
quarters wonder about the strange crystal sphere kept there. 
Slightly larger than the glass buoys used by fi  sherfolk,  the  
sphere contains a swirling turquoise mist, and it rests clutched 
near the captain’s bedstand in a preserved and upended harpy’s 
talon. During battle, Captain Jakes hauls the crystal sphere and 
harpy-leg monopod onto the aft deck, where he sits on a closed 
locker, hunches over the sphere, and strokes it possessively 
while barking orders to his mates and crew. He appears quite 
mad, but the Thunder Sail Argosy has survived, and the crew 
doesn’t care whether that is due to cunning or luck as long 
as the gold is good and the grog is thick.
 Members: Most members of the A rgosy are fi  ghter/rogues  
or swashbucklers, and many take levels in duelist. A few 
important offi  cers are sorcerers or druids, and they function 
as artillery and environmental control. Finally, like every 
sailing ship, each Thunder Sail vessel has at least one bard, to 
sing shanties in time with the hauling of ropes and alleviate 
the thirsty, languorous days between plunderings.
     The Argosy is not concerned about those who leave its 
ranks—and  in  fact  it  frequently  asks  men  to  leave  the  
crew (often at the end of a plank after they have crossed 
the captain).
 Secrets: When  you  rise  to  a  captaincy,  Captain  Jakes  
informs you of the Thunder Sail Argosy’s hidden power and 
purpose. Once a prominent plantation owner in a southern 
kingdom, Jonas Jakes saw his daughter, a powerful druid 
who helped him tend his crops, polymorphed into a green 
mist by a chaotic, mad archmage who rode his horse through 
town one day and casually sowed destruction in his wake. By 
620_95374_Ch7.indd   180620_95374_Ch7.indd   1802/8/06   4:22:14 PM2/8/06   4:22:14 PM

181
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
some arcane accident, Jonas’s daughter Ellyrese retained her 
intelligence and spellcasting ability. Jonas keeps her in the 
crystal sphere on the harpy-leg monopod in his quarters, and 
now she uses her druid magic to cast spells for him to turn 
the tide of a battle or to speed the Argosy on its way. Jonas 
is desperately searching for an island with a white alabaster 
cliff dwelling containing “no more than one eye, no less than 
fi ve mouths,” which a seer once told him would be the key 
to restoring his daughter.
     Ty p e : Fighting company.
    Scale:    5 (city).
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level
Base attack bonus +5 or higher +2
5 or more ranks in Profession (sailor) +2
5 or more ranks in Perform (sing) or another Perform 
skill suitable for shipboard life +2
Can cast control weather or similar effect +10
Can summon water elementals, water natural allies 
to careen ship without need to run it aground +4
Is an outlaw +2 (per outlawing kingdom)
Sails on a successful raid with the Argosy +4 per raid
Has own ship to add to the Argosy +6
Has no ranks in Profession (sailor), Climb, 
or Balance –2 per skill
Has tattoo of Imperial Naval service 
or kills an albatross  –8
Disobeys captain –10, and you are fl ogged
Causes ship to be scuttled –50, and you are marooned
Titles, Benefi  ts,  and  Duties: As you 
advance in the Argosy, you de-
velop  your  seamanship,  
win plunder, and 
perhaps even rise 
to the captaincy. 
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower No affiliation.
4–10                                Able-Bodied Seaman: The affi liation does 
not recruit you, but does recognize your 
seamanship.
11–20                            Corsair: +2 competence bonus on Profession 
(sailor), Balance, and Climb checks while on 
board one of the Argosy’s ships.
21–29                            Ship’s Offi cer: Gain an average of 200 gp per 
month in plunder.
30 or higher     Captain of the Rain Hawk or the Red 
Lightning: You assume the captaincy of a 
pirate ship; you can command a group of ten 
pirates (eight 1st-level fighter/1st-level rogues, 
one 3rd-level fighter/4th-level rogue, and one 
7th-level druid) on one mission per month.
 Executive Powers: Plunder, raid, terrorize.
WINTERVEIN DWARVES
     Symbol: The Winter vein sy mbol is a tr iang ular mountain 
rent with cracks or veins.
Background, Goals, and Dreams: A col lect ion of clans, the 
Wintervein Dwarves are a cross between a nomadic tribe and 
a crusading army, continually on the move against the goblin-
oids,  aberrations,  and  other  horrors  of  the  deepest  caverns.  
The Winterveins delve deeper into the earth than most other 
dwarves, seeking out new caverns and transforming them into 
The Thunder Sail Argosy approaches 
another stepping stone on Captain Jakes’s quest
Illus. by M. May
620_95374_Ch7.indd   181620_95374_Ch7.indd   1812/8/06   4:22:21 PM2/8/06   4:22:21 PM

182
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
habitable communities. Winterveins typically secure a cavern 
complex deep underground, build a fortress-city there, then 
push deeper underground until they fi nd a hospitable spot 
for their next city. They’re the dwarves on their race’s most 
important frontier: the one that extends below the feet of all 
other dwarves. 
Ty p e : Fighting company (racial).
Scale: 11 (multiregional/duchy).
Affiliation Score Criteria: The Winterveins function 
like a “super-clan,” so every blood member is a dwarf. The 
group has a number of nondwarf allies, but only dwarves 
can earn affi liation.
     The Winterveins often send clan members on scouting 
or raiding missions, either in the company of their clan 
comrades or w ith al l ies of other races (such as an advent ur ing 
party). But the deeds that earn the most respect among the 
Winterveins aren’t the assaults on goblin forts or mind fl  ayer  
strongholds—they’re the successful defense of dwarven com-
munities on the underground frontier when they are beset 
by invading drow, vengeful duergar, or other opponents. 
Criterion                                        Affi liation Score Modifi er
Character level +1/2 PC’s level 
Cleric, fi ghter, or paladin +1
Dwarven defender prestige class +2
Per successful mission +2
Per defense of besieged dwarf citadel +4
Titles, Benefi  ts, and Duties: The Wintervein dwarves 
are masters of both alchemy and genealogy, and they can 
create “ancestral infusions” that give the imbiber a measure 
of the fortitude and strength of their famous forebears. Those 
infusions  are  the  mechanism  that  
delivers your affi  liation  benefi  ts.
     When you reach a leadership position among the Winter-
veins, you are the leader of a large extended family (with all 
the politics that entails), and you’re the general of a dwarf 
army on the march. Over the course of a single council 
meeting, you might declare a crusade against a mind fl  ayer  
city, hire adventurers to fi  nd the lost Hammer of Resounding 
Rings, and placate a dwarf elder who is having a hard time 
fi  nding wives for his sons. 
Affiliation 
Score               Title:               Benefi ts and Duties
3 or lower  Not affiliated or junior member with no 
benefits.
4–14                                Defender of Wintervein: +2 racial bonus on 
attack rolls against orcs and goblinoids.
15–22                            Hero of Wintervein: As bonus feats, gain 
Weapon Focus (dwarven waraxe) and 
Weapon Focus (dwarven urgrosh). +6 racial 
bonus on attack rolls against orcs and 
goblinoids. Dodge bonus against giants 
improves to +6.
23–29                            Foehammer of Wintervein: +4 racial bonus 
on attack rolls against orcs and goblinoids. 
Dodge bonus against giants improves to +8.
30 or higher     Lord of Wintervein: As bonus feats, gain 
Improved Critical (dwarven waraxe) and 
Improved Critical (dwarven urgrosh).
 Executive Powers: Craft, crusade, raid.
CREATING YOUR 
OWN AFFILIATIONS
To create your own affi  liation, follow these steps:
         (1)  Devise  a  concept,  name,  symbol  (if  desired),  and  
background.
    (1a) Create information (if desired) pertaining 
to members, enemies and allies, and secrets of 
the affi  liation.
        (2)  Choose  your  affiliation’s  type  and  
category.
       (3) Choose its scale.
       (4) Select the affi  liation  score  criteria.
         (5)  Create  the  titles  held  by  members  and  
select  the  benefi ts and duties that accom-
pany each title.
       (6)  Choose  the  executive  powers  
available to the leader or leaders of the 
affiliation.
Keep in mind that creating your own a f fi  liation  
is a bit like creating a new magic item and 
pricing it; tweaking is sometimes neces-
sary. While these rules can be used like 
a cookbook to combine ingredients and 
make a decent product, there is always 
room for extra fl  avor. Astute readers will 
notice that the sample affi liations do not 
always follow this process in lockstep. You 
are encouraged to modify your affi  liations  as  
The Winterveins delve deep into the darkest underground reaches
Illus. by S. Ellis
620_95374_Ch7.indd   182620_95374_Ch7.indd   1822/8/06   4:22:30 PM2/8/06   4:22:30 PM

183
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
desired, and your DM is encouraged to allow for it, so that they 
fi  t your game and campaign world as well as possible.
     As discussed, affi  liations bring many new aspects to your 
game. As you’re working through your creation ideas, don’t 
forget that many of them can be enr iched even f ur ther i f other 
people at the table are doing the same with affi  liations  of  their  
own. Friendly rivalries between affi  liations can provide great 
motivation and background for adventure.
CONCEPT AND BACKGROUND
It is most helpful to devise a general concept for your affi  li-
ation at the outset. Will it openly rule in an area, or will it 
act behind the scenes? Are its members, assets, or abilities 
clandestine or hidden? Does it have a specifi  c creed or objec-
tive? The answers to these questions help direct your creative 
efforts and make the affi  liation more coherent and real.
    Beyond a general concept, the extent of your affi  liation’s  
background is entirely up to you. Indeed, the ex tent of what ’s 
known about your affi  liation is as broad as your imagination. 
The following topics can be considered when devising your 
affi  liation. They might be set at the outset. Alternatively, you 
can move on to the other creation steps after only jotting 
down a few notes about your concept. Further details can 
be left for the end of the creation process, or for description 
and evolution during game sessions.
    The example affi  liations described earlier in this chapter 
make up a varied collection, yet they barely scratch the sur-
face of what sorts of affi  liations you can create for yourself. 
Each piece of information that can be part of an affi  liation’s  
description is discussed below.
 Name: The name of your a f fi  liation could be descriptive of 
its interests or concerns, or it could be a “false front” hiding its 
true agenda. It could be complex, legalistic, or long-winded, 
evincing an effort to impress or awe the general populace. 
Or it might be short or obscure, requiring a certain level of 
inside information to understand its true meaning.
     Symbol: Design your a f fi  liation’s symbol (if you want it to 
have one), bring it to the table, and place it near your character 
sheet whenever affi  liations are involved in play.
     Motto: Perhaps everyone in your affi  liation shares a battle 
cry, or perhaps they intone the same blessing before every 
sunset. (The example affi liations in this chapter have no 
mottoes, so you can come up with one you like if you want 
to use an affi  liation “out of the box.”)
 Background, Goals, and Dreams: Just as your character 
is motivated by his past and driven to his future, so should 
your affi  liation be. Did it start in the slaughterhouse of Bravik, 
only to become a powerful mercenary company scourging the 
hinterlands? Did it once r ise to dominate the cit y ’s arcane soci-
ety, only to be shattered by the demons it once commanded? 
Does your affi  liation want to merge with another affi  liation?  
Destroy one? Draft the king’s niece into its ranks?
     Enemies and Allies: You might choose one or two affi  li-
ations, races, regions, or creature types that your affi  liation  
cannot abide. Perhaps your affi  liation wants to expunge them 
from the ear th, feels snubbed by them at cour t, or was al most 
exterminated by them after a mass immigration from another 
continent. In combat, members of the affi  liation attack these 
enemies  preferentially,  and  in  parley,  they  bait  and  insult  
them. The opposite applies to those creatures of individuals 
you choose as allies. They should be given aid and succor 
where possible, and you should expect similar treatment in 
return.  Some  information  on  how  this  relationship  came  
about, what the degree of cooperation is, and how steadfast 
the relationship is would be useful as well.
     Members: Name some of the other people in your affi  li-
ation.  Identify  the  leader,  his  or  her  subordinates,  and  the  
rivals  vying  for  position  within  the  affi  liation.  You  might  
consider, with the DM’s permission, co-opting several pre-
viously existing NPCs from the campaign to be members 
of your affi  liation. Think about how your affi liation treats 
ex-members (if it tolerates them at all).
    Secrets: The byzantine politics of some affi  liations  afford  
them ample opportunity to gestate a tangled mass of secrets. 
If you like, choose one or two secrets for your affi  liation.  Share  
them with your DM, but only give hints about them within your 
party. Then, at an opportune time, unveil the secret. Perhaps your 
order is more ancient than anyone guesses, and under another 
name it founded the ruined castle you are now exploring—only 
your order’s motto will activate the magic mouth on the nether 
cyst below the throne room. Perhaps you’ve been hinting at 
surprise allies, and when you reach the vampire’s manse, you 
tap on the portcullis to summon the beast’s apothecary, who 
is actually a spy for your guild.
TYPE
Choose your affi  liation’s type: business, cabal, college, druid 
circle, fi  ghting company, government, spy ring, temple, thieves’ 
guild,  or  tribe.  This  selection  affects  the  executive  powers  
available to the affi  liation’s  leaders.
     Some concepts might be diffi  cult to defi  ne neatly. A group 
of related individuals (tribe) might be engaged in a profi  table  
enterprise (business) selling illegal goods (thieves guild). 
However, for the purpose of executive powers, you’ll need to 
set one type as the affi  liation’s  primary  focus.
CATEGORY
Decide  whether  your  affi  liation  is  a  racial  one  or  a  social  
one, and include “(racial)” in the Type entry of the affi  liation  
description if appropriate. (The concept you create could 
dictate which category the affi  liation belongs in.)
SCALE
Choose your affiliation’s scale in conjunction with your 
Dungeon Master. Table 7–1, below, provides guidelines.
     As  a  general  rule,  the  scale  of  an  affi liation is an indica-
tion of how high up the ladder of infl uence it can rise. For 
instance, a scale 12 affi  liation could obtain an audience with 
the  king;  a  scale  8  affi  liation  probably  has  the  count’s  ear;  
a scale 3 affi liation might get a hasty hearing by the local 
burgomaster on a slow day. 
    The exact meaning of scale could vary from affiliation 
to affi liation, however. For example, an affi liation does not 
necessar i ly need to be scale 19 to have in fl  uence on the Outer 
Planes. Take a cabal of scale 6—it has infl  uence throughout a 
roughly city-sized area or population. This city might be the 
620_95374_Ch7.indd   183620_95374_Ch7.indd   1832/8/06   4:22:39 PM2/8/06   4:22:39 PM

184
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
City of Brass on the Elemental Plane of Fire, and the cabal’s 
scale might be explained by the fact that it is extremely 
secretive and almost unheard by the general population on 
its home plane.
     You must have the Leadership feat to found an affi  liation.  
If you do so, it nor mal ly begins at scale 1. Campaign circum-
stances might dictate otherwise, however, so you should 
consult with your Dungeon Master.
Table 7–1: Affiliation Scale
Scale  Scope of Infl uence Examples 
  1 Neighborhood  Bakery, druid hermit
  2 Neighborhoods Crossroads tavern
  3 City quarter Small abbey, small 
                      nomadic           tribe
  4 City quarter Bank, slaughterhouse, 
  barbarian trading post
  5 City Arena, pirate ship, 
                      githzerai           rrakma
  6 City City watch, wild elf tree tribe
  7 City and outliers Large college, tyrant wizard 
  in tower, death slaad 
  commanding a populous 
                      gnoll           tribe
  8 City/county Frontier fort, druid sect
  9 Regional/barony Small castle, established 
                      church
10 Regional/march Minor nobility, powerful guild
11       Multiregional/duchy       Nobility,       established       knightly
  order, dread pirate fleet
12 Multiregional/kingdom  Standing army, orc hordes 
  led by legendary chieftain
13 Multiregional/kingdom  Vast army raised to fight off 
 and vassal states the tarrasque
14 Continental/ Centuries-old large kingdom, 
 seafaring kingdom illithid underground nation
15 Continental/empire Emperor and his legions, 
  circle of archmages
16 Multicontinental/ Imperial legions with arcane 
           empire           and           divine           support
17 Global Ancient order of epic-level 
                      knights
18 Astral Plane Githyanki incursion force
19 Multiplanar Armies in the Blood War 
  between demons and devils
20       Cosmos       Epic-level       affiliations,       
                      hero-deities
AFFILIATION SCORE CRITERIA
Affi  liations measure a member’s value by a number of fac-
tors. Some are baseline: If a character is not of the proper 
religion, nationality, race, alignment, class, or other nature, 
his affi  liation score is irrelevant (absent special dispensation 
from the leadership). First, decide i f your a f fi  liation  enforces  
any such prerequisites.
     Other than baseline criteria, numerous other aspects of a 
character are considered when awarding benefi  ts and status 
in a group. For your affi  liation, choose up to thirteen of the 
criteria listed on Table 7–2. 
     A social affi  liation can (and usually does) have some nega-
tive criteria—characteristics or accomplishments that reduce 
a character’s affi  liation score instead of increasing it. As a 
rule of thumb, select one negative criterion for every positive 
criterion beyond the fi fth one you choose (six positive and 
one negative, seven positive and two negative, eight positive 
and three negative, or nine positive and four negative).
     For the most part, racial affi  liations do not have negative 
criteria; once you’re in a racial affi liation, you have to do 
something pretty outrageous to lower your status in the 
group—and such lowering is usually accomplished by simply 
kicking you out of the group.
     Because it is easier to move up in the ranks of a smaller affi  li-
ation than a larger one, the base modifi ers given on Table 7–2 
must be adjusted according to the affi  liation’s scale. The base 
modifi  ers given are for affi  liations with a scale of 1 to 7. For 
affi  liations of scale 8 to 14, divide the modifi  ers given by 2. For 
affi  liations of scale 15 to 20, divide the modifi  ers given by 4. The 
minimum impact of a criterion after modifi  cation  is  1/2.
Table 7–2: Affiliation Score Criteria
Positive Criteria Affi liation Score Modifi er
Expertise and power +1/2 character levels
Is a member of a favored race +1
Charisma 13 or higher +1
Base attack bonus of +5 or higher +1
Base attack bonus of +10 or higher +2
5 or more ranks in an appropriate skill +1
10 or more ranks in an appropriate skill +2
Has a feat that is signifi cant to the affi liation +1
Can cast arcane or divine spells +1
Can cast 3rd- to 4th-level spells +2
Can cast 5th- or higher-level spells +3
Has/does not have a familiar +2
Member of a prestige class important to 
the affiliation +2
Possesses a magic item significant 
to the affiliation +1/10,000 gp value
Wealth +1/20,000 gp value
Landowner                                                                         +2
Noble title +2
Lives in a favored region +1
Parents or siblings in the affiliation +2
Marries into a family whose head is an 
affi liation member +2
Recruits a new member into the affiliation +1
Spends ten or more years in the affi liation +2
In the thrall of a member of the affiliation +2
Recommendation of a member who has an
affi liation score of 21 or higher +2 
Saves the life of a member who has an 
affiliation score of 21 or higher +3
Adventures with a member of the affiliation  +1
Completes a mission assigned by the affi liation +2
Makes a discovery important to the affiliation +2
Humiliates an enemy of the affi liation +2
Defeats a violent enemy of the affiliation in combat 
(the foe’s CR must be equal to or or greater
than the character’s level) +1/4 the creature’s CR
Destroys an artifact anathema to the affi liation +4
Razes a stronghold of one of the affiliation’s enemies    +8
Makes a pilgrimage or journey important 
to the affi liation +2
Donates money or magic items to the affiliation (a
maximum per year might be set, after which donations
accrue no additional bonus) +1/1,000 gp donated
620_95374_Ch7.indd   184620_95374_Ch7.indd   1842/8/06   4:22:46 PM2/8/06   4:22:46 PM

185
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Negative Criteria Affi liation Score Modifi er
Is of unfavored race –2
Associates with unfavored race –2
Has been dead –4
Has been undead –6
Charisma 8 or lower –2
Lacks base attack bonus of a certain level –3
Lacks ranks in a certain skill –2
Lacks a feat that is signifi cant to the affi liation –3
Lacks ability to cast a spell –2
Has/does not have a familiar –2
Is of opposed alignment –4 to –20
Acts in a manner befi tting opposed alignment –4
Known to be friendly with opposing affiliation    –2 to –20
Known to be a member of opposing affi liation –20
Face, hair, time and place of birth, birthmark, or other
quality marks the character as undesirable –20
Lives in unfavorable area –2
Loses or destroys affi liation property –1/1,000 gp value
Fails in combat –2
Falls in combat with affi liation’s hated foe or rival –4
Steals from the affiliation –10
Composes a song ridiculing the affiliation 
or a prominent member –10
Has been/has never been to an Outer Plane –2
TITLES, BENEFITS, AND DUTIES
Fill in titles as you wish for affi  liation  scores  of  4  through  
30. In general, each ranking covers a range of six points of 
affi  liation score, but variances are common. Often it is easier 
to move through the lower ranks than the upper.
    Choose three to five benefits from Table 7–3 for your 
affiliation. If you choose more than three benefits, it’s a 
good idea to choose one duty (so that members don’t get 
too many benefits without having to do something to earn 
them). If you choose four benefits, you should select one 
duty, and if you choose five benefits, you should select 
two duties.
    Not all the benefi ts and duties detailed in the example 
affi  liations appear in Table 7–3. You and your DM should 
feel free to devise your own benefi  ts and duties, using the 
ones given here as guidance.
Table 7–3: Affiliation Benefits and Duties
Benefi ts (affi liation score 11 or higher, or 4 or higher for 
racial affi liations)
+2  circumstance  bonus  on  particular  skill  checks  within  a  
geographical region
+2 circumstance bonus on particular skill checks when 
working with other affi liation members or affi liation 
resources
100 gp/month income (or 200 gp for a business affiliation)
Ability to share spellbooks with one spellcaster of your 
level once per month
Personal valet or servant (CR 1 or lower)
Purchase spellcasting from your affi liation or an allied one 
at 3/4 standard price
Rent-free use of small flat in undesirable neighborhood
Requisition one 1st-level potion or scroll per month
Travel with impunity through an allied affiliation’s territory
Benefi ts (affi liation score 21 or higher, or 15 or higher for 
racial affi liations)
+1 on attack rolls against members of an enemy affiliation
10% discount on experience or gp cost when crafting
Bard song— +1 bonus on Diplomacy checks in a tavern whose 
primary language matches that of the song
Call in favor—lower your affi liation score by 5 permanently 
to gain access to arcane or divine spell of 5th level or 
higher for 1/4 standard price
Claim audience with the king/emperor/theocrat within 1d6 
days once per month
Communications network lets you use the Gather 
Information skill across the duchy, sea, or planes, 
depending on the scope of your affi liation, without 
requiring you to move from your hometown
Dreamwalker—if sleeping in affiliation headquarters and can 
prepare arcane spells, prepare one unknown spell per 8 hours 
sleep if it is known to another sleeper in the headquarters
Paper charm—when burned, word of recall (caster level 
equal to affi liation scale, minimum 11th) takes you 
and possibly allies back to your headquarters
Personal honor guard of 4–6 appropriate creatures (EL 8)
Purchase spellcasting from your affiliation or an allied one 
at 2/3 standard price
Benefi ts (affi liation score 30 or higher)
Personal hagiographer (6th-level gnome bard) shadows your 
every move with quill in hand, recording your deeds for the 
affiliation’s records and the benefit of general posterity, 
strumming his lute and rhyming about your life when not 
engaged in his primary task
Borrow one item of up to 15,000 gp value from the 
affi liation’s stores once per month for 2d4 days 
(30,000 gp value if the guild’s scale is above 10); while 
the item is borrowed, the guild’s capital is decreased 
by 1 if the item is valued at more than 10,000 gp
Monument—your affiliation, a grateful populace, or a coterie 
of rich, adoring sycophants erect an obelisk, a dolmen 
garden, or a statue in your honor, granting you a +2 bonus 
to your Leadership score and a +2 circumstance bonus 
on Diplomacy and Intimidate checks when dealing with 
people who have seen your monument
Personal honor guard of 4–12 appropriate creatures (EL 12)
Form friendship with head of allied af f iliation (of ten a creature 
of CR 10 + 1/2 scale)
Ancient advisors—the spirits of the former affi liation heads 
are trapped within will-o’-wisplike glowing balls on the 
Wisp Crown, a symbol of your offi ce; three times per 
day you can use the Wisp Crown’s ancient advisors 
to grant you a +6 insight bonus on any Appraise, 
Decipher Script, Knowledge, Sense Motive, or Use 
Magic Device check
Claim audience with a rival (but not enemy) affiliation head 
within 1d4 weeks once every three months
Duties (affi liation score 11 or higher, or 4 or higher for 
racial affi liations)
Enemy affiliation’s members gain +1 on damage rolls against 
you
Enemy affi liation’s members have hostile reaction and 
impose –10 penalty on Diplomacy checks
Must destroy five items or creatures anathema to your affiliation 
in one month or reduce affiliation score by 1
Must donate 5% of treasure to affi liation
Must make pilgrimage or endure initiation ritual or dangerous 
journey
620_95374_Ch7.indd   185620_95374_Ch7.indd   1852/8/06   4:22:52 PM2/8/06   4:22:52 PM

186
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Duties (affi liation score 21 or higher, or 15 or higher for 
racial affi liations)
Good judgment—make DC 20 Appraise check once per 
month;  failure  indicates  loss  of  200  gp  and  affiliation  
score reduced by 1
Must recruit one new member per month or reduce 
affi liation score by 1
Must defeat a CR 9 creature in single combat
Must donate 10% of treasure to affiliation
Duties (affi liation score 30 or higher)
Assassination attempts—if you fail to uncover a plot each 
month with a DC 30 Gather Information check, then you 
must face a CR 12 assassin (can be simplif ied: make DC 
15 Fort save or die)
Great judgment—make DC 20 Appraise check once per 
month; failure indicates affi liation loses 1 capital
Must defeat a CR 13 creature in single combat
Mutiny—succeed on DC 15 Diplomacy check once per month 
or face mob/challenger (EL 12)
EXECUTIVE POWERS
Affi liation leaders wield executive powers to accomplish 
many tasks on a grand scale. Generally, a leader must have an 
affi  liation score of 30 or higher in order to gain the authority 
necessary to exercise these powers. 
     Choose  three  executive  powers  for  your  affi  liation  from  
among those described below. The executive power descrip-
tions limit certain powers to certain affi  liation types. This 
was done to balance out the value of the various types. You are 
free to ignore those restr ictions i f your campaign or stor yl ine 
dictates otherwise.
     Some of the abilities encompassed by executive powers are 
only used if you are playing with dynamic affi  liations  (using  
the rules for capital, violence checks, espionage checks, and 
negotiation checks).
    Assassinate: You r a f fi  liation can retain the services of an 
assassin (or send one of its own). The level of the assassin is 
equal to 1/2 the affi  liation’s scale (minimum 1; maximum 10 
+ 1/2 its scale). Because it takes time to prepare a strike, an 
assassin can be assigned one mission each three months. You 
could resolve the results of an assassin strike using normal 
D&D rules, or you might decide to resolve things “offstage.” 
In the latter case, make an opposed espionage check against 
the victim’s affi  liation (or against the victim’s Spot check, if 
he has no affi  liation). If you succeed, the assassin penetrates 
your  target’s  counterinfi ltration measures and strikes. The 
victim must succeed on a Fortitude save against the normal 
DC for the assassin’s death attack or perish.
     Cabals, druid circles, governments, spy rings, temples, and 
thieves’ guilds can retain assassins.
    Beatify:    The deeds of a saint are to those of an ordinary 
man as the clouds are to the earth. Serene, high, and aloof, 
the saints move through our world, and yet seem not wholly 
a part of it. Your affi  liation has the power to declare someone 
a potential saint; someone who is beatifi ed gains the title 
Blessed or Hallowed. A living creature who is beatifi  ed  gains  
a +2 sacred bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate checks 
when dealing with other members of her faith. When she 
casts a cure spell on a member of her own faith, she adds her 
Wisdom bonus to the amount cured (maximum bonus equal 
to the spell’s level).
    Druid circles and temples can beatify a creature.
     Craft: Hammers ring on anvils, saws hum through wood, 
and kraken-ink quills scratch on half-petrifi  ed  calf  vellum  
at  your  affi liation’s headquarters. Your affi liation is adept 
at producing valuable items. It can craft any masterwork 
item or magic item from the Dungeon Master’s Guide with a 
market pr ice of up to 2,0 0 0 × the a f fi  liation’s scale. This item 
belongs to the affi  liation, but you can borrow it according 
to the benefits of your title in the affiliation description. 
Mobilizing the affi liation in this way is a big job; to do so 
requires either an expenditure of 1 capital or a successful 
negotiation check (DC 15 + 1 per 2,000 gp value of the item) 
to bargain with supply and labor vendors. The process of 
crafting is not quick; you must wait 1–2 months to receive 
the item. During this time your affi  l iation is free to engage 
in other actions.
     Businesses, cabals, druid circles, colleges, temples, and 
tribes can craft items.
     Crusade: You r a f fi  liation can declare a crusade. You des-
ignate an enemy and attempt a Diplomacy check (DC 20 + 
scale of target affi  liation, or DC 20 + level of target creature). 
If  you  succeed,  your  followers  martial  their  resources  and  
travel any distance to attack the offending blasphemer. If the 
target is an a f fi  l iation, ma ke opposing v iolence checks. If your 
affi  liation is successful, an opposing affi  liation loses 1 capital. 
If the target is an individual, he must make a Fortitude save 
(DC equal to your violence check result). If the target fails, 
he perishes under your affi  liation’s  righteous  onslaught.
     If you wronged an enemy affi  liation by prying out the ruby 
eyes of its sacred idol, selling the head of its demon guardian 
at auction, or rescuing a screaming sacrifi  ce from its altar, 
your rival might retaliate by targeting your character with 
an unholy crusade. Your DM might set aside the normal 
Fortitude save and choose to play out an encounter. In that 
case, you will be set upon by creatures appropriate to the 
rival affiliation, with an EL equal to 10 + your opponent’s 
violence bonus.
    Each month that it crusades, an affi  liation loses 2 capital 
due to the cost of the ongoing operations.
    Fighting companies, temples, and tribes can crusade. A 
crusade can target an individual, business, college, fi ghting 
company, government, temple, or tribe. Spy rings, druid 
circles, cabals, and thieves’ guilds are too elusive for such 
punishment.
    Excommunicate:    You might instruct your affiliation 
to shun an individual or an entire group. No cleric of your 
affi  l iat ion w i l l help an excommunicated creat ure or a member 
of an excommunicated affi  liation. If the excommunicated 
creature fails a Will save (DC 10 + the scale of your affi lia-
tion), your edict is so strong that for a period of 1 year, the 
subject cannot benefi t from a divine spell cast by anyone 
w ith an al ignment descr iptor in common w ith those of your 
church. For example, if a lawful good church of Heironeous 
excommunicates a creature and it fails its save, the creature 
cannot benefi  t from divine spells from a caster who is either 
lawful or good.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   186620_95374_Ch7.indd   1862/8/06   4:22:59 PM2/8/06   4:22:59 PM

187
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
    Druid circles, temples, and tribes can excommunicate 
individuals.
    Gift:    Your affiliation might bestow a valuable gift when 
it  matters  most.  After  receiving  a  gift,  the  mercenary  
company sends extra troops, the temple sends its staff of life 
along with the bishop, and the thieves guild doesn’t pick-
pocket your members on the way back from the tavern. 
When your affiliation sends a gift to someone, you or an 
agent of your affiliation receives a +4 competence bonus 
on  your  next  Diplomacy  check  involving  the  recipient  
of the gift.
    Alternatively, when your affiliation sends a gift to an 
appropriate organization, it secures a +2 competence bonus 
on its next violence, espionage, or negotiation check, provided 
the attempt is undertaken within 2 months of the gift. For 
example, a gift to a fi ghting company could secure a bonus 
on your next violence check.
     Businesses,  colleges,  governments,  and  temples  can  
send gifts.
    Harvest:    The wisdom or savvy of your affi  liation’s  leader  
allows your members to work the land to your advantage, 
coaxing  crops  from  grudging  soil  or  teasing  out  precious  
metals  from  jealous  rock.  When  your  affi  liation  uses  the  
Har vest power, make a DC 20 Appraise check. If your result 
is between 21 and 30, each member of the affi  liation  receives  
gold (your share is 50 gp × the affi  liation’s scale), and the affi  li-
ation itself enjoys a +1 circumstance bonus on all violence, 
espionage, and negotiation checks for the next 2 months. If 
your result was over 30, you can choose the above benefi  ts,  
or your affi  liation can gain 1 capital.
    Businesses and tribes can harvest.
     Holiday: You r a f fi  liation has the power to declare holidays. 
These holidays can be perennial (Angels Day, Wyrm Waking 
Day, Feast of the Chapeaux of St. Cuthbert) or one-day events 
marking  grand  occasions  (the  dauphin’s  wedding  day,  the  
triumph  over  Snurre  and  the  hill  giants,  the  arrival  of  the  
Duke of Brass’s ambassador). Any citizen in a land celebrating 
the holiday, and any member of an affi  liation observing the 
holiday,  gains  a  +1  morale  bonus  on  all  attacks,  saves,  and  
skill checks during the day. No more than one holiday per 
month can be declared.
    Druid circles, governments, and temples can designate 
holidays.
    Inquisition:    With the ringing of the steeple bells, your 
holy organization declares a hunt for blasphemers. Designate 
one target affi  l iation. Throughout your area of in fl  uence,  that  
affi  liation falls under the shadow of suspicion.
    On an individual level, members of the targeted affili-
ation are harassed by dedicated inquisitors. For each day 
they spend in the lands of the inquisition, they must suc-
ceed on a Fortitude save (DC 10 + your affiliation’s scale) 
or be fatigued.
     On  an  affi  liation  level,  suspected  groups  are  forced  to  
curtail some activities and conceal others. The target of an 
inquisition must succeed on an opposed espionage check or 
be unable to use any executive power requiring a violence or 
negotiation check during the next month.
     Maintaining  an  inquisition  is  expensive  and  interferes  
with  day-to-day  activities.  Each  month  when  you  conduct  
an inquisition, you must succeed on an opposed negotiation 
check with the local government or lose 2 capital.
     Druid circles and temples can press an inquisition. Individ-
uals, businesses, colleges, fi  ghting  companies,  governments,  
temples, and tribes can be targeted. Cabals, druid circles, spy 
rings, and thieves’ guilds are too elusive for persecution.
    Law: You r a f fi  liation can write and enforce law through-
out its domain. You might outlaw arcane or divine casting, 
concealed weapons, magic items, gnomes, or anything else 
you  desire.  If  an  object  or  practice  is  outlawed,  anyone  
caught using it, engaging it, or being it is fi  ned or jailed, as 
you decide. Penalties beyond a fi  ne of 100 gp × your scale 
are rare.
    An individual can attempt a Disguise check (DC equal 
to your espionage check result) to engage in an outlawed 
practice with impunity. If you outlaw an affi  liation,  it  goes  
underground  and  takes  a  –2  penalty  on  all  checks  until  
it relocates or the ban is lifted. A banned affi  liation  has  a  
maximum capital of 1.5 × its scale, and it is exterminated if 
its capital reaches 0.
     Particularly outrageous laws could require your affilia-
tion to present the plan persuasively to your countr y men; 
a Diplomacy check (DC 20 + scale) is required to accom-
plish this.
     You r     a f fi  liation can also make a law requiring certain tasks 
of citizens in your area. If all citizens are required to undergo 
martial training, each adult militia member in your lands gains 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
EXCEPTIONS TO THE RULES
If your concept for a new affiliation doesn’t mesh neatly with the 
guidelines for creating your own affiliation, don’t let the guidelines 
keep you from doing what you want (within reason, of course). 
    In particular, several of the affiliations presented earlier in this 
chapter don’t rigidly follow the guidelines concerning executive 
powers, so they can serve as examples of exceptions to the gen-
eral rules.
    The Caravan of Shadows is a business that has the executive 
powers pariah and shadow war, both of which are not normally 
available to businesses—but they work well in the context of this 
affiliation’s concept.
    The Chalice is a fighting company that has the inquisition 
executive power—a justifiable exception for a group of holy 
crusaders.
    Dragon  Island  is  a  government  affiliation  that  has  four  
executive powers rather than the usual three, reflecting the 
overall  power  not  only  of  the  affiliation  but  of  its  highest-
ranking members.
    The leaders of the Wintervein Dwarves have access to the 
craft executive power, which is not normally available to a fight-
ing company—but for a fighting company of dwarves, it makes 
perfect sense.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   187620_95374_Ch7.indd   1872/8/06   4:23:06 PM2/8/06   4:23:06 PM

188
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
a +1 competence bonus on attack rolls, and your government 
as a whole gains a +1 competence bonus on violence checks. 
If you require all citizens to be literate, local civil servants 
are recruited from a more knowledgeable populace and your 
government  gains  a  +1  competence  bonus  on  negotiation  
checks.  If  you  require  all  citizens  to  participate  in  a  state  
religion or a state industry, every citizen gains at least 1 rank 
in  Knowledge  (religion)  or  Profession  (relevant  industry),  
and a +1 competence bonus on checks made using that skill. 
If you raise taxes to an extraordinary level, you have a 25% 
chance of gaining 1 capital each month. Other requirements 
and benefi  ts are possible; consult with your Dungeon Master. 
Requirements demand a citizen’s time and energy, however, 
and  only  one  such  requirement  can  be  in  place  at  a  time  
(establishing a new requirement counts as the affi liation’s 
use of executive power for that month). Requirements are 
also  oppressive—your  affi  liation’s  leader  must  make  a  DC  
30 Diplomacy check or reduce his affi  liation score by 1 each 
month that the requirements are in place.
    Normally, only governments can set laws. If there is no 
government in a region, druid circles or temples might enforce 
scripture as law.
    Mint:    You r a f fi  liation stamps its leader’s face on coins and 
issues them as currency. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus 
on Intimidate and Diplomacy checks with money-using 
creatures in lands where the coins circulate. The awe inspired 
by such a powerful act might shake your foes’ resolve; anyone 
who confronts you in battle and has used your coins spends 
the fi  rst round of combat shaken (no save). You also receive 
free meals and free stays in inns or roadside houses with a 
DC 5 Diplomacy check.
     Governments can mint coins, and if the government allows 
it, businesses can do so as well.
     Pariah: Through rumor, propaganda, forgeries, and lies, 
you portray an individual as anathema to his affi  liation.  You  
spread tales of priests slaughtering innocents, of businessmen 
squandering  riches  on  games  of  knucklebones,  of  soldiers  
plotting sedition. This causes the individual to be outcast 
from his affiliation. The target’s affiliation score drops to 
0 temporarily, during which time he has no access to any 
affi  liation  benefi  ts, funds, items, or abilities.
     You r     a f fi  liation  must  succeed  on  an  espionage  check  or  
negotiation  check  opposed  by  the  individual’s  Diplomacy  
check to make the rumors stick. If the individual exercises 
executive power within his affi  liation, he can add his guild’s 
negotiation bonus on his Diplomacy check as a compe-
tence bonus.
    Each month, the pariah can attempt to clear his name by 
making the same opposed check. When he succeeds, the 
record is fi  nally set straight, and the sheep-faced members 
of his affi  liation welcome him back with his full affi  liation  
score restored. A pariah who has cleared his name cannot 
be again outcast from his guild with the pariah power for 1 
year plus 1d12 months.
     Cabals, spy rings, and thieves guilds can declare a member 
to be a pariah.
     Plague: Filth fever, centipede swarms, corn blight, a rain 
of shocker lizards—all these are examples of plague. When 
your affi  liation plagues a land or another affi liation, each 
affected person must make a Will save (DC equal to your 
violence check result) each day of the month. Failure imposes 
a –1 penalty on all saving throws for that day. Any leader 
of a plagued affi liation must make a Diplomacy check (DC 
equal to your violence check result) with the members of 
his affi  liation any time he wants to use an executive power; 
failure means that he is powerless in the face of the plague 
and his affi  liation score decreases by 1.
    Druid circles, temples, and tribes can bring a plague. 
Businesses, colleges, druid circles, fi  ghting companies, govern-
ments, temples, and tribes can be targeted by a plague. Cabals, 
spy rings, and thieves’ guild are too small and too diffuse to 
be affected by a plague. 
    Plunder: Treasure is the goal, and speed is the means. 
When your affi  liation plunders an area, you are not attempt-
ing to damage it permanently only to add to your own wealth. 
When  your  affi  liation  launches  a  plundering  attack,  make  
an opposed violence check. If successful, you gain gold and 
gems; your share of the loot is 100 gp × your affi  liation  score.  
The enemy has a 1 in 6 chance of losing 1 capital as a result of 
your plundering; your affi  liation has a separate 1 in 6 chance 
of gaining enough treasure to increase its capital by 1.
     Fighting companies, governments, spy rings, thieves’ guilds, 
and  tribes  can  plunder.  Only  businesses,  colleges,  govern-
ments, and temples can be plundered.
    Raid:    A raiding party seeks to deal as much damage as 
possible and escape unscathed. Make an opposed violence 
check with the target affi  liation. If your check is successful, 
the opposition suffers the loss of 1 capital. If unsuccessful, 
your raiding party has been trapped in the enemy’s territory. 
Make  opposed  espionage  or  negotiation  checks  to  either  
sneak or talk your way home. Failure indicates that the raid-
ing party perishes and your affi  liation loses 1 capital.
     Cabals,  druid  circles,  fi  ghting  companies,  governments,  
spy rings, thieves’ guilds, and tribes can stage raids.
    Research:    Gathering information is the raison d’etre for 
spy rings and colleges, but it is useful for other affiliations 
as well. When your affiliation conducts research, you can 
make an arcane discovery or unearth information about 
your enemies.
     You r     a f fi  liation can research any arcane spell. The leader 
must pay the market price of a scroll of that spell in seed 
money for the research. In 1d4 months, your affiliation 
produces a scroll of the researched spell.
     Your group can also research opponents. Against any 
NPC who has been researched, you and other members of 
your affi  liation gain a +1 insight bonus on attack rolls in the 
fi  rst  round  of  combat  (after  that,  the  NPC  realizes  you  are  
anticipating his moves and switches tactics).
     Finally, research can be conducted on an enemy affi  liation.  
Your group gains a +2 insight bonus on its next violence, 
espionage, or negotiation check against that affi  liation.
    Cabals, colleges, and spy rings can conduct research.
     Shadow     War:     You r  a f fi liation stalks the alleys, the under-
passes, the rooftops, and the dark copses on the edges of country 
lanes.  From  concealment  you  strike,  and  to  concealment  
you return. When engaged in a shadow war, your affi  liation  
620_95374_Ch7.indd   188620_95374_Ch7.indd   1882/8/06   4:23:12 PM2/8/06   4:23:12 PM

189
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
makes  an  opposed  espionage  check  against  your  target.  If  
your check fails, your target exposes your affi  liation  before  
it can strike, and your affi  liation takes a –2 penalty on nego-
tiation checks for the next month. If your check succeeds, 
your  shadow  strike  is  true.  If  your  successful  check  result  
was 10 or lower, your enemy affi liation’s internal structure 
is disrupted, and it takes a –2 penalty on violence, espionage, 
and negotiation checks for the next month. If your success-
ful  check  result  was  between  11  and  20,  the  opposition’s  
command  and  control  structure  is  paralyzed,  preventing  
any affi  liation member from using any benefi  ts for the next 
month. If your successful check result was higher than 20, 
your opponent loses 1 capital.
    Cabals, druid circles, spy rings, and thieves’ guilds can 
start a shadow war. 
     Ter ror ize : Skull f lags on the horizon, ominous drums 
along the mountains, illusions cast on pillows that cackle 
suddenly to life and screech out bloody warnings when the 
target lies down to bed—all these are techniques used by 
your  affi liation to strike terror in the hearts of individuals 
and other groups. 
     You r     a f fi  liation can speak eloquently to the victim, threat-
ening violence, or it can swing for the kneecaps and actually 
provide the violence. A terrorized individual must make two 
Will saves (DC equal to your violence or negotiation check 
result). If she succeeds on both, there is no effect. If she fails 
one, for the next month she is shaken in the fi rst round of 
combat when fi  ghting a member of your affi  liation. If she fails 
both, for the next month, she is frightened of any member of 
your affi  liation  and  fl  ees at the fi  rst  opportunity.
     Your group can also attempt to terrorize an enemy affi  lia-
tion. To do so, make an opposed negotiation or violence check 
(depending on how you would like to deliver the threat). If 
your affi  liation wins, the opposing affi  liation cannot use any 
executive powers during the next month.
     Even the worst atrocities become commonplace if repeated 
too often. An individual or affi  liation cannot be targeted for 
terrorism more than one month out of every four.
     If your affi  liation succeeds on an opposed espionage check 
before terrorizing another affi liation, the victim does not 
know who terrorized it.
     Cabals, druid circles, fi  ghting companies, governments, spy 
rings, thieves guilds, and tribes can terrorize. Cabals, druid 
circles, spy rings, and thieves guilds cannot be terrorized.
     Trade:     Commerce is the life blood of business, and it can 
provide a much-needed infusion of capital for other affi  lia-
tions as well. When your group trades, choose one friendly 
affi  liation. Each organization gains 1 capital. Make opposed 
negotiation checks; whoever wins has a 1 in 6 chance of 
gaining 1 additional capital.
    Alternatively, your affiliation’s trade connections can 
help an individual entrepreneur. If your affi liation’s trad-
ing facilities are put at the disposal of an individual, he 
gains a +4 competence bonus on Appraise checks and a +2 
competence bonus on any Diplomacy checks that involve 
trade for 1 month. 
    Lastly, a trading network can provide rumors of exotic 
items. Make a DC 20 negotiation check. If it succeeds, a seller 
has been located who possesses a wondrous item determined 
randomly from those described in the Dungeon Master’s Guide 
(50% chance for a minor item, 30% chance for a medium item, 
20% chance for a major item; roll on Table 7–27, 7–28, or 7–29 
as  appropriate).  Because  of  your  trading  connections,  you  
have a percentage discount equal to your affi  liation’s  scale  
should you purchase the item. For example, if you belong 
to an affi liation with a scale of 12, you would receive a 12% 
discount on the purchase.
    Only businesses and colleges can instigate trades, but 
any other type of affiliation can be the other partner in 
a transaction.
     Wa r : Fires sweep the rooftops, and the plains shake under 
the boots of marching troops. War means many different 
things depending on your campaign, but two results are 
constant. First, throughout your affi  liation’s sphere of infl  u-
ence,  prices  double.  This  price  increase  affects  everything  
from adventuring equipment such as 10-foot poles and scrolls 
of lesser restoration to mundane items such as livestock and 
food. It applies both to purchases and to crafting expenses, 
including item creation costs. 
    Second, whenever a PC attempts to contact an NPC who 
resides in the area ravaged by war, the NPC must make a DC 
12  Fortitude  save.  Failure  means  the  NPC  has  perished  in  
the war. Your DM might make this check once per month 
for  other  important  NPCs  she  deems  at  risk,  regardless  of  
whether anyone attempts to contact them.
    Every month that your affi  liation is at war, the war effort 
decreases its capital and its enemy’s capital by 1. Additionally, 
make opposed violence checks. The loser suffers an additional 
loss of 0–2 capital (roll 1d6; 1–2 = 0, 3–4 = 1, 5–6 = 2). 
     Your DM might have an NPC-controlled affi  liation  declare  
war. If two governments exist in the same territory, they 
must go to war until one perishes (even if war is not an 
executive power possessed chosen by either government). A 
wise affi  liation keeps its warchest well stocked with ingots; 
poor affi  liations are ripe targets for conquest.
    Fighting companies, governments, and tribes can start a 
war. War can be waged against a college, fi ghting company, 
government, temple, or tribe. Cabals, druid circles, spy rings, 
and thieves guilds are too elusive. Businesses are mobile 
enough to avoid war, but can be outlawed by governments. If 
a business is outlawed, however, it simply turns to the black 
market (see the law executive power). 
EX AMPLE OF PL AY
The players at the table include Leigh (Mialee the wizard), 
Wendy (Lidda the rogue), William (Regdar the fi  ghter),  and  
Matt (Jozan the cleric). Jody is the Dungeon Master.
William (Regdar): A 1! I leap back out of the way.
Wendy (Lidda): I was trying to open the—
Jody (DM): Lidda trips the wire and stone rumbles overhead. 
The crepuscular light fades. When you look up, you can 
see by Regdar’s torch that a stone disk has rotated into 
place over the exit, trapping you at the bottom of this 
raptor-pharaoh shaft.
620_95374_Ch7.indd   189620_95374_Ch7.indd   1892/8/06   4:23:19 PM2/8/06   4:23:19 PM

190
CHAPTER 7
AFFILIATIONS
Matt (Jozan): How are we going to get back out? Mialee, what 
about Hanali’s Circle?
Leigh (Mialee): No, don’t you remember the shadow war with 
the Vecna cabal? They attacked in Avrillet last month and 
paralyzed a lot of our activities. So, no new word of recall 
charms for a while. We really do need to go after the One 
and the Five once we get out of here.
Wendy (Lidda): Right, Tall and Slender, your friends might 
be fl inging acid arrows in the alleys up north, but my 
guild mates are right here guarding the codex. I bet they 
can let us out.
Lidda climbs to the top of the shaft and hangs from two pitons 
and a krenshar-hide saddle strap.
Wendy  (Lidda):  I  shout  for  my  guild  mates  to  help  while  I  
am trying to pick the lock.
Jody (DM): It’s unpickable from this side. In fact, there is no 
lock. However (makes a Listen check for Lidda), you do 
hear the sounds of shouts, then ringing steel on steel and 
the whoosh of fi  reballs.
William (Regdar): Blood of the emperor! It must be the 
Reviled vanguard. On open ground. Can your rogues 
take them?
Wendy (Lidda): I don’t know . . .
Jody (DM): You specifi  cally brought them for this mission, so 
I’m going to rule that they’re not surprised by the Reviled, 
even though the light-adapted trogs belly-crawled through 
the sand from the direction of the sunset. Do you have 
individual stats for your guild force? [Lidda shakes her 
head.] Then give me a violence check.
Wendy (Lidda): I rolled a 14 and add my guild’s +2 violence 
bonus. 16!
Jody rolls d20 adds the Reviled affi  liation’s violence bonus.
Jody (DM): 15. The Violet Ghosts win by one. A single surviv-
ing  guild  mate  arm-drags  himself  through  the  reeking,  
bloodied sand to the top of the shaft. He scratches at the 
stone, and after a great deal of encouragement from you, 
he fi  nally hits the mechanism to tilt the plug-disc. The 
stars are out by now, and the stench of the Reviled comes 
through the opened gap.
Later, after the party has set up watches: 
Leigh  (Mialee):  If  there’s  nothing  going  on  during  my  
watch, I’m going to read the codex for any clue on which 
shaft  is  Iathra’s  tomb,  since  our  first  guess  obviously  
wasn’t right.
Jody (DM): The stiff pages are filled with religious ico-
nography  and  veiled  allusions.  Give  me  a  Knowledge  
(religion) check.
Leigh rolls d20 and adds her Knowledge (religion) skill 
modifi  er plus another 1 because religious knowledge has 
permeated her homeland, the territories around Castle 
Mairo, ever since the baron made it the law for all citizens 
to participate in the Pelorite religion.
Leigh (Mialee): Let’s see, with modifi  ers, I rolled a 15.
Jody (DM): Just made it!
Leigh (Mialee): Heh. Jozan, I might grumble, but apparently 
the mandatory worship of Pelor has its uses!
Jody (DM): You learn that the shafts of the raptor-pharaohs 
are  laid  out  according  to  dynasty,  and  Iathra’s  shaft  
should be the one closest to where the sun sets on Wyrm 
Wa k i ng   D ay.
The next day, the party descends into the correct tomb.
Jody (DM): Jozan’s boots bang down on the sandstone tomb 
and puff up a cloud of dust. All right, everybody that has 
been living in Castle Mairo, this is the start of the day’s 
activities, so let’s see the Will saves. These are to avoid 
the effects of the rain of shocker lizards that the Reviled 
plagued you with last new moon. They rolled a 14 on their 
violence check, so that’s the DC.
Matt (Jozan): 17. Pelor has no respect for the Reviled.
William (Regdar): 13. Gah! –1 to all my saves today.
Leigh (Mialee) 21. I scoff at the darkness.
Jody (DM): Okay, as you’re cursing the ape-frogs, Regdar, you 
become aware of a scurrying in the dust. A small spider 
is running out of the passage to the north, zipping past 
Jozan’s feet.
Matt (Jozan): I squash the nasty thing with my mace!
Jody chuckles.
Jody (DM): It offers no resistance. Both you and Regdar 
hear something in the passageway behind the spider. Sud-
denly you see what the spider was running from—three 
troglodyte degenerates galloping on all fours straight 
toward you.
William  (Regdar):  Troglodytes!  I  charge  and  yell,  “For  
Herridek!”
Jody (DM): A bloody battle brews, it would seem. Jozan, 
I need an espionage check for the Sun Fane. There are 
Reviled agents within; if you fail, they have infiltrated 
your hierarchy and knew that you were coming. In that 
case, they will have sent at least a few more tomb denizens 
to your little welcome party.
Matt (Jozan): Whoa. Espionage is not the Sun Fane’s strong 
suit.
Wendy (Lidda): Can the Violet Ghosts assist?
Jody (DM) : Sure, ma ke an espionage check, DC 10. If you 
succeed, you add a +2 bonus on the Sun Fane’s check.
Wendy rolls d20 and adds her affi  liation’s espionage bonus.
Wendy (Lidda): 23, no problem.
Matt rolls d20 and adds his affi  liation’s espionage bonus plus 
2 for Wendy’s help.
Matt (Jozan): Only an 11. Ouch!
Jody rolls d20 and adds the Reviled’s espionage bonus.
Jody  (DM):  16.  The  Reviled  spies  in  the  Sun  Fane  have  
compromised your agents and learned their plans. There 
are two additional carrion crawlers here to welcome you. 
I could have done this a while ago, of course, but I wanted 
you to see the rolls and have an opportunity to roll for your 
own affi  liation.
Jody picks up two carrion crawler miniatures.
Matt (Jozan): Remind me to ask you about an inquisition 
when we get back! There are spies in the fort!
Jody (DM): The degenerates leap upon you, their familiar 
stench closing around your lungs like a dragon’s claw. You 
can hear the wet sucking sounds of the crawlers’ footpads 
as they blindly feel their way down the walls and ceiling 
of the passageway behind the troglody tes. It ’s that time, 
everyone—roll for initiative!
620_95374_Ch7.indd   190620_95374_Ch7.indd   1902/8/06   4:23:25 PM2/8/06   4:23:25 PM

he DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game offers a great 
deal  of  flexibility  in  character  creation  and  
advancement. When you make a character, you 
can choose any race or class combination, select 
from a wide variety of feats, and buy ranks in 
any  skills  you  wish.  Once  you’ve  made  these  
decisions, however, they cannot be changed. Most of the 
time those early decisions work out fine, but sometimes 
you might regret your previous choices. Maybe you didn’t 
fully understand the ramifications of the choice you made. 
Or  maybe  you  constructed  a  character  around  a  great  
concept, but in play, the particular set of circumstances 
that  would  let  your  character  shine  never  cropped  up.  
And even if you built your character to perfection, each 
new  supplement  presents  new  classes,  feats,  spells,  and  
special  abilities,  many  of  which  might  better  serve  the  
needs of your character or the campaign than those you 
previously selected.
    It’s  true  that  part  of  the  D&D  game’s  challenge  is  
making smart choices in creating or advancing your char-
acter. But a DM who forces someone to play a character 
he doesn’t find enjoyable isn’t making the game fun for 
that player or the others at the table. In such a situation, 
the player usually either throws away the character and 
rolls up a new one, or quits the game. If your campaign 
values character continuity (as many campaigns do), nei-
ther of those outcomes is especially attractive. Why force 
Mike to throw away the elf fighter he’s been playing for 
three months just because he made a couple of bad feat 
choices,  when  allowing  him  to  change  those  choices  
would be so much better for the storyline? If Mialee 
has been an integral part of the campaign since Day 
1 but has regretted being an elf since Day 2, wouldn’t 
it be better to let her become the half ling she would 
prefer to be by undergoing a dramatic transformation 
at the Necrotic Cradle (see page 203) than to abr uptly 
replace her with Liamee the half ling wizard? The fact 
that Liamee the half ling coincidentally has the same 
spells, feats, skill ranks, and familiar as Mialee the 
elf  did  but  has  no  connection  to  the  campaign  or  
the rest of the party is stretching credulity perhaps 
a bit too far.
     This  chapter  presents  rules  for  revising  various  
aspects  of  your  character  during  play.  With  this  
system, you can modify elements of your character 
to better fi  t your vision of who your character should 
be—both to meet the needs of the party and to face 
the threats presented during the course of an entire 
campaign.  Though  character  revision  does  allow  
you  to  “rewrite”  certain  elements  of  your  charac-
ter,  the  rules  presented  here  ensure  that  the  changes  
remain within reason and do not upset the story that 
has already been created by each character’s deeds in 
the campaign.
191
Illus. by R. HorsleyIllus. by R. Horsley
620_95374_Ch8.indd   191620_95374_Ch8.indd   1912/8/06   4:23:58 PM2/8/06   4:23:58 PM

192