CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
BARBARIAN
All stand in awe at the berserker fury you tap at will, enhanc-
ing your strength and toughness at the expense of reason. 
But what do cultured people know of the frozen wastes or 
hellish jungles that forged your earliest experiences? The 
cruel vicissitudes of growing up “savage” were normal to 
you. When your older brother was lost on a bear hunt one 
day, and your younger sister died of disease in the howling 
dark late one night, how could you know that in other places, 
they might not have had to die? These and other experi-
ences marked you, and you stand apart 
from  those  born  into  the  comforts  
of civilization.
     Suggested     Backgrounds     (choose     
one): Gladiator,   Mariner,   
Tribal Origin.
    Suggested    Personality    Ar-
chetypes  (choose  one):  
Challenger, Explorer, 
Mercenary,  Orphan,  
Renegade,  Savage,  
Seeker, Simple Soul, 
Wanderer.
CHARACTER 
THEMES
One or both of the 
following character 
themes could apply 
to you.
Fearless: You a re 
made of stern stuff. 
You’re  not  fool ish,  
but you’re not afraid 
to test your mettle 
and resourcefulness 
against any foe. If you 
are told a foe is beyond 
your  ability  to  defeat,  
you need more evidence 
than merely the claim. You 
do not boast, but make bold 
statements that echo your expe-
riences and resolve.
Once  you  are  actually  embroiled  in  a  
confl ict, you prefer a quick, urgent battle cry. 
A  battle  cry  is  a  yell  intended  to  rally  your  
allies while putting fear into the hearts of enemies. See the 
Barbarian Battlecries sidebar and create a few of your own 
battlecries tailored to your experience.
“Fear cannot thwart my will.”
“I braved the deadly glacier’s darkest, coldest crevasse [/disease-
rotted deep jungle] for three days—this trial cannot compare with 
that feat.”
“If you fear to cross swords with the foe, pray for a quick death, 
for you’ll never fi nd fulfi llment in this life.”
“It is in hours such as these that heroes are born!”
“Fear breeds fear!”
 Tattooed: You r fl  esh is scribed with one or more pictures 
or  symbols  that  signify  your  connection  with  the  ancient  
principles of your barbarian past. One or more of the follow-
ing tattoos adorn your body.
 Arrowhead: You wear this simple pointed tattoo on your 
forehead.  You  believe  that  it  lends  you  alertness  in  your  
dealings, both in combat and in your perception of the lies 
others tell you. Most people are certainly distracted by it.
 Bear: Across your chest is tat tooed a might y bear, whose 
inexhaustible strength is your strength, and whose capac-
ity to keep fighting even when sorely wounded is a quality 
you also possess.
  Butterfl y:  This  stylisti-
cally  rendered  winged  
thing is (you claim) a but-
terfl  y, and you tell all who 
admire  it  that  it  signifi  es  
everlasting life.
  Circle:  This  tattooed  
open  circle  (or  hoop)  is  
the  universal  symbol  of  
wholeness, female power, 
and infi nity. If you are 
female,  you  have  this  
emblem  tattooed  on  
your forehead, and all 
who see it know that 
you are an avatar of the 
feminine spirit.
Crossed  Swords:  The  
weapons  you  choose  
to wield say a lot about 
you, but they gain great-
er  significance  when  
their representations are 
tattooed upon your fl  esh.  
Such tattoos are tokens of 
good luck, and as long as 
they are visible, you know 
that you cannot suffer last-
ing defeat.
Demon: By  tattooing  a  de-
monic image on your chest (instead 
of a bear), you indicate to others that 
you have no love for piety, show no mercy 
to  your  enemies,  and  don’t  care  the  least  bit  
for propriety.
Dragon  Scales: Your cheeks are tattooed with radiant 
dragon scales, which indicate the position of authority that 
was  yours  prior  to  your  leaving  your  savage  land,  or  the  
chiefdom that awaits you when you one day return to forge 
a mighty barbarian horde.
 Lightning: Jagged lines scribed down your lower jaw and 
neck represent bolts of swift lightning, and you believe 
their presence lends you swiftness of pace and possibly 
of thought.
 Mask: In l ieu of other facial tat toos, you’ve chosen to cover 
your face with a single tattoo representing a fi  erce animal or 
Krusk the Conqueror, 
barbarian warlord
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel
620_95374_Ch2.indd   32620_95374_Ch2.indd   322/8/06   3:09:45 PM2/8/06   3:09:45 PM

33
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
monster, a nature spirit, or an ancestor. Your tribal shaman 
convinced you that the application of such a painful and 
encompassing (and disfi guring!) tattoo would allow you to 
more easily contact the spirit world and gain the power of 
the spirit or animal represented by the mask. Alternatively, 
you were shunned or cast out by your tr ibe. The tat too cover-
ing your face forever marks you as an outcast to your tribe, 
unworthy to associate with the people of your birth.
 Naga: Instead of snakes spiraling up your arms, you have 
tattooed human-headed nagas! The nagas represent anarchy 
and indicate to others who understand the symbol that you 
follow no law but your own, civilization be damned.
 Snake: Tat tooed sna kes coi l around your upper ar ms, simple 
but colorful. Their heads point toward your head, imparting 
their wisdom to you in spirit, if not in voice.
 Spider: On the pal m of one of your hands, hidden in nor mal 
deal ings w ith strangers, the tat too of a night-dark spider lurks 
with fi  ve of its legs extending up onto the undersides of your 
fi  ngers. To you (and others fami l iar w ith the sy mbolog y), the 
spider represents trickery and even death, though others 
might say treachery instead of trickery. When engaged in 
trickery (or treachery), it is your habit to reveal your open 
palm to the victim of your trick (or double-cross) as the nature 
of your action becomes apparent to them.
 Sun Rays: On the backs of your hands are tattooed the long 
rays of the golden sun. Just like you can count on the sun rising 
daily, people can count on you, as this tattoo signifi  es.
 Toad: You believe that this minor tattoo you wear on one 
shoulder helps protect you from witchcraft, evil spells, and 
demonic infl  uences.
BERSERKER STRENGTH
The decision of when to rage is one of the toughest faced by 
a barbarian. Selecting the berserker strength class feature 
in place of rage removes the need for this often complicated 
tactical decision, replacing it with an automatically activated 
boost to your combat prowess and durability. In short, when 
the going gets tough, you get tougher.
 Level: 1st.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
rage (or any later improvements to that class feature).
 Benefi  t: Whenever your current hit point total is below 5 
× your barbarian level, your berserker strength automatically 
activates. You gain a +4 bonus to your Strength score, a +2 
bonus on saves, damage reduction 2/—, and a –2 penalty to 
your AC. The damage reduction granted by berserker strength 
stacks with any similar kind of damage reduction.
    There is no limit to the number of times per day your 
berserker strength can activate. While berserker strength is 
active, you have the same limitation on actions as a barbarian 
in rage (PH 25). You cannot voluntarily end your berserker 
strength, although you automatically drop out of it while 
unconscious, helpless, or (most likely) when you receive heal-
ing to bring your current hit points above the threshold.
     At 11th level (or if you would gain the greater rage class 
feature from any class), your berserker strength improves 
instead. The bonus to your Strength score improves to +6, 
your bonus on saves improves to +3, and you gain damage 
reduction  3/—  (or  your  existing  damage  reduction  of  the  
same kind improves by 3).
    At 20th level (or if you would gain the mighty rage class 
feature from any class), your berserker strength instead 
improves again. The bonus to your Strength score improves to 
+8, your bonus on saves improves to +4, and you gain damage 
reduction 4/— (or your existing damage reduction of the same 
kind improves by 4).
     Any  effect  that  would  normally  apply  only  during  your  
rage applies whenever your berserker strength is active.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Destroyer
Half-Orc Barbarian
    Ability    Scores:    Str 17, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 12, Cha 6.
    Skills:    Climb, Jump, Swim.
     Feat: Power Attack.
     Weap o ns :     Greataxe (1d12/×3), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 9 gp.
Package 2: The Hunter
Elf Barbarian
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 16, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb, Handle Animal, Listen, Survival.
     Feat:     Track.
     Weap o ns :     Battleaxe (1d8/×3), shortbow with 20 arrows 
(1d6/19–20, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded  leather  (+3  AC),  heavy  steel  shield  
(+2 AC) .
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 1 gp.
Package 3: The Whirlwind
Human Barbarian
     Ability     Scores:     Str 14, Dex 15, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb, Intimidate, Jump, Listen, Swim.
     Feat: Two-Weapon Fighting, Weapon Focus (kukri).
     Weap o ns :     Two kukris (1d4/18–20), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
pqs
BARBARIAN BAT TLECRIES
Below are a few battle cries you enjoy screaming out to mark 
the beginning of a conflict, or into an enemy’s face in the midst 
of battle.
[a shriek like a high-pitched yowl of a wildcat]
Blood for the Blood God!
Break the bones, hew the flesh!
Death to the city dwellers!
For the North! [or your tribe name]
Scream your last!
Your guts for a garter!
Your skin for a shawl!
Your skull for a cup!
pqs
620_95374_Ch2.indd   33620_95374_Ch2.indd   332/8/06   3:09:54 PM2/8/06   3:09:54 PM

34
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
BARD
You roam the bright kingdoms and less savory regions of the 
world alike, amassing lore, negotiating tricky deals, scouting, 
gambling, spying, relaying messages, and telling epic stories. 
You work magic with your music, infl  uencing the hearts and 
minds of both friends and foes. In the end, the best stories 
end up being about you.
     Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Artisan, Drifter, Mariner, 
Noble Scion.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Daredevil, 
Explorer,  Innocent,  Mercenary,  Orphan,  Rebel,  Renegade,  
Royalty, Trickster, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Military Historian: This character theme requires you 
to have at least one rank in Knowledge (history). You are a 
student of confl  ict, an expert on the subject of the famous 
battles between prehistoric tribes, ancient militaries, and 
modern armies between kings and necromancers. 
    Now and then, you regale your friends with snippets of 
these histories. You fi  nd it all so interesting that you know 
everyone else would feel the same way, if only they were 
exposed to the sagas.
     “We could learn something from the Battle of Rakdar, fought 
three hundred years ago. When the army of King Yria encoun-
tered  an  allied  army  of  eight  kings  at  Rakdar,  it  was  utterly  
decimated by the much larger force. King Yria learned the value 
of alliances then.”
    “The Battle of Ceschremi sent ten thousand warriors to their 
graves, because reinforcements didn’t arrive when Emperor Drezzar 
ordered. Over the years, his generals had taken the money meant to 
keep reinforcements at the ready and instead bought fi  ne mansions 
for themselves in the countryside. Those were later burned by the 
Ceschremi army, which advanced unopposed.”
 Negotiator: In some groups, your diplomatic skills will 
exceed those of all your friends. To be a good negotiator, you 
must be fair, but stern. While the Diplomacy skill provides 
the mechanical resolution of a scene, DMs enjoy hearing the 
gist of your negotiating points as a precursor to attempting 
the skill check.
     Really, it’s all about the “spin.” With the proper spin, even 
a three-day-dead orc can be made to sound enticing. For 
example, if you are attempting to explain to a city offi  cial  
why your group was responsible for so much destruction in 
a recent street altercation, you might say:
    “Your honor, consider the devastation that would have otherwise 
been wrought. Consider the buildings unburnt, lives saved, and 
money still safely in coffers precisely because of our actions!”
     On the other hand, if you are trying to trade in an unneeded 
magic weapon for some other trifl  e that you or a friend would 
prefer, try:
 “Your eyes miss nothing, madam, but of course you couldn’t know 
that this blade was once the boyhood dagger of the playwright 
Isheuan. Indeed, his honeyed words are a delight to all. And this 
blade was grasped in that same hand that also takes so ably to the 
pen. Consider its value now!”
 Riddlemaster: You absorb stories, but you collect riddles. 
A good riddle is a treasure in itself, and “a thorough knowl-
edge of riddles keeps the intellect fl  exible and sharp,” as you 
are fond of saying. More than that, a knowledge of riddles can 
prove useful in negotiations with certain enigmatic beasts, 
prideful kings, or any foe whose conceit compels it to agree 
to test of riddles to resolve a dispute.
    Every bard knows at least a few riddles. Beyond these 
beginning few, you are constantly on the lookout for more, 
whether through research in dust y tomes, or by r iddl ing w ith 
strangers and fr iends, al ly or foe, even when there is nothing 
at stake. In this way, you are able to collect ever more riddles 
for your growing repertoire. You are also adroit at creating 
your own riddles.
 How To Write A Riddle: Use three rules when writing a 
riddle.
    1) Pick an word or phrase as the answer to your riddle.
    2) Turn the word or phrase over and over in your head, 
free-associating and making note of any unusual or off-the-
wall idea that comes to mind.
     3)  Come  up  with  clues  about  these  ideas  you’ve  just  
generated.
     Put it all together, tidy it up, and you might have just created 
a riddle that will last the ages.
 Spy: Even if you don’t have a commission, you can play up the 
fact that you might be working under offi  cial  authority—after  
all, you’ve (supposedly) done so in the past.
    Purchase a leather-bound journal (in game), and keep 
copious notes about all your surroundings, exploits, and 
the doings of your acquaintances. At some later point, your 
habits could reveal an important clue that was missed earlier. 
To prevent anyone else from gleaning the same in for mation, 
you keep this journal in a cipher.
 Ciphers: A cipher is a way to record information in such a 
way that it is obscured to those without special knowledge. In 
most cases, this special knowledge is a key (for simple ciphers) 
that provides the necessary insight for rearranging letters into 
their proper order or otherwise rendering a message legible.
     If you end up actually acting as a spy for a merchant guild, 
temple, or other organization, you can pass a note every few 
sessions to the DM using a simple cipher—assuming the DM 
aids you in this endeavor.
     One of the simplest ciphers replaces each letter of the alphabet 
with a different letter that is a certain number of letters away. 
For instance, if the cipher is “letter +1” (replace each letter 
with the one that follows it in the alphabet), then the message 
“J bn b tqz,” when decrypted, reads “I am a spy.”
 Storyteller: You are a repository of stories both ancient and 
contemporary. From the wealth of stories at your disposal, 
the lessons of history and adages of past bards and sages are 
at your fi ngertips. Use this knowledge to your advantage 
when you wish to infl  uence an ally’s (or foe’s) opinion about 
something, such as a plan of action or a proposed agreement. 
By preceding your point with a reference to a story (real or 
made up), you lend additional weight to the point you make 
immediately afterward. Most sentient creatures feel the 
pressure of precedent of others’ past experience on a similar 
matter, even if you’ve invented the story on the spot (as long 
620_95374_Ch2.indd   34620_95374_Ch2.indd   342/8/06   3:10:01 PM2/8/06   3:10:01 PM

35
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
as they don’t know you’re ma king it up). Of course, it ’s bet ter 
if you actually have a story, or a piece of history told as a story, 
in mind before you attempt this tactic.
     For example, when con fronted w ith a par ticular thorny 
problem, especially if you see a solution, stroke your chin 
and say:
“This reminds me of the time Prince Voltred tried to enter his 
falcon in the archery contest. Funny thing about that. . . .”
    Or, when you disagree with a conclusion, try:
 “The slave Medricar thought the same thing, when he once 
escaped his master to live in the forest. He fi  gured he could survive 
on the wild herbs and honey he would fi  nd. Good thing he changed 
his mind. . . .”
     Or,  when  you  believe  not  enough  forethought  has  gone  
into an ally’s proposed course of action:
 “Might work, yes, but you remember Darvn, who rushed into 
the Cave of the Yellow Skull? If he had just watched a little longer, 
he’d have seen the giant sleeping behind the stone.”
BARDIC KNACK
Wandering bards learn more mundane skills and less esoteric 
knowledge on their travels. If you select this class feature, 
you have done a little bit of everything; maybe you spent a 
few months as a wilderness guide, and you also had a cousin 
in an ambassador’s retinue who regaled you with tales of 
courtly intrigue.
     The bardic knack class feature makes you more capable of 
accomplishing simple tasks with a wide variety of skills. You 
don’t  need  to  dabble  in  noncritical  skills  (unless  you  want  
to be considered trained in their use), freeing up your skill 
points to focus on a small range of crucial skills.
Level: 1st.
Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
bardic knowledge.
Benefi  t:  When making any skill check, you can use 1/2 
your bard level (rounded up) in place of the number of ranks 
you have in the skill (even if that number is 0).
     For example, a 5th-level bard would have the equivalent of 
3 ranks in Appraise, Balance, Bluff, and so on (but only for 
the purpose of making skill checks).
     You can’t take 10 on checks when you use bardic knack 
(to take 10 you have to use your actual ranks). If the 
skill doesn’t allow untrained checks, you must 
have at least 1 actual rank 
to attempt the 
check.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Controller
Half-Elf Bard
    Ability    Scores: Str 10, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 8, Cha 15.
     Skills:     Bluff, Diplomacy, Disguise, Gather Informa-
tion, Knowledge (local), Perform, Sense Motive.
    Languages:    Common, Elven, Celestial.
     Feat:     Skill Focus (Perform).
     Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d8/19–20), shortbow with 20 arrows 
(1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Common musical instrument, spell component 
pouch, standard adventurer’s kit, 9 gp.
     Spells     Known:     0—detect magic, lullaby, mage hand, prestidigitation.
Package 2: The Problem Solver
Gnome Bard
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 10, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Bluff,  Concentration,  Craft  (alchemy),  Listen,  Per-
form, Spellcraft, Use Magic Device.
 Languages: Common, Gnome, Goblin.
     Feat:     Arcane Flourish*.
     Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d6/19–20), shortbow with 20 arrows 
(1d4/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC), 
    Other    Gear:    Common musical instrument, spell component 
pouch, standard adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
    Spells    Known:    0—dancing lights, detect magic, mage hand, 
read magic.
Package 3: The Vanguard
Human Bard
     Ability     Scores:     Str 10, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 8, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Concentration,  Diplomacy,  Escape  Artist,  Listen,  
Perform, Spot, Tumble.
Languages: Common, Draconic.
     Feats:     Combat Expertise, Still Spell.
     Weap o ns :     Rapier (1d6/18–20), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC), light wooden shield (+1 
AC, 5% arcane spell failure).
    Other    Gear:    Common musical instrument, spell compo-
nent pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 22 gp.
          Spells     Known:     0—detect 
magic,  ghost  sound,  light,  
message.
Gimble, Herald 
of the High Crown
Illus. by S. Belledin
620_95374_Ch2.indd   35620_95374_Ch2.indd   352/8/06   3:10:08 PM2/8/06   3:10:08 PM

36
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
CLERIC
You are a representative of an almighty deity’s authority in the 
mortal world. You give thanks daily to the good fortune that 
put you in such an enviable position. You know fi  rsthand  that  
the places of natural beauty, the structure of societies, and 
even existential cosmic laws would falter and perhaps collapse 
altogether without divine infl  uence and intervention.
    However, deities work through agencies other than mere 
divine decree. In fact, gods prefer to work through interme-
diaries such as you when possible. You use the power of your 
deity to make your god’s will manifest. In doing so, your lot 
improves, as you are raised slowly up in the eyes of the deity you 
serve with each deed you accomplish in your god’s name.
    Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Artisan, Ascetic, Noble 
Scion.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Compan-
ion, Crusader, Innocent, Leader, Martyr, Orphan, Prophet, 
Royalty, Sage, Seeker, Simple Soul, Theorist.
CHARACTER THEMES
One  or  more  of  the  following  character  
themes could apply to you.
Giver of Blessings: Since you are an 
instrument of your deity’s will, you of-
ten fi nd yourself (along with your 
companions) in tight spaces. In 
such circumstances, it is custom-
ary  for  you  to  bless  yourself  
and your companions with 
your god’s benefi  cence  im-
mediately  prior  to  taking  
desperate action.
     Keeping such blessings 
to  a  minimum  number  of  
words is a good idea, given that 
you are usually only moved to 
give a blessing when circum-
stances are dire.
    You  are  partial  to  one  or  
more of the following blessings 
(substituting  your  deity’s  name  
for Pelor):
“Refresh and gladden our 
spirits.
    Purify our hearts.
    Illumine    our    powers.
    We lay our hope in Pelor’s hands.”
“Bless us, oh Pelor,
    and these thy weapons which
    we are about to deploy in thy name,
    through your benefi cence.”
“We humbly beseech you from the bottom of
    our hearts to succor us in our necessity.”
Missionary: You believe without question that others would 
benefi  t by conversion to the worship of your deit y. You have ta ken 
it upon yoursel f to be a propagator of your rel igion, and draw 
upon one of the following methods of proselytization.
 Conversion through Exhortation: You are a strident evangelist 
who exhorts others to consider your deity’s worship at every 
opportunity. For instance, whenever you heal a companion, 
you murmur:
 “Through Pelor ’s g race, be healed. If your belief were g reater, how 
much greater would the relief from your wounds be?”
     On the other hand, when smiting enemies, you scream 
(regardless of whether your friends have yet converted):
 “When you cross me, you cross the great god Pelor and earn his 
wrath, and the wrath of all his disciples!”
 Conversion by Example: You never exhort your companions 
to convert, but instead serve your deity lovingly and well. You 
heal your companions at need, smite enemies, and accomplish 
other duties required by the company you keep.
     After months of showing how the grace of Pelor helps you 
through example, you are ready 
to choose your moment. At 
some point your aid, heal-
ing  prayer,  or  other  good  
work will come at just the 
precise moment to save or re-
new one of your companions. 
This is the time to whisper per-
suasively in his or her ear:
        “Consider  what  Pelor  has  done  for  
you—it is through his aid that I have aided 
you. If you say so now, I will tell you more of 
Pelor later.”
 In this way, you can slowly bring one or 
more of your companions into the fold.
  Prayerful:   You   k now   t hat   
maintaining  the  channels  of  
communication  between  
yourself  and  your  deity  is  
necessary, not just when your 
god grants your spells, but all 
day through. However, the ad-
venturing life being what it is, 
your prayers are short and sweet, 
and you drop them into conver-
sation when possible.
        For  instance,  whenever  
you make a particularly force-
ful  assertion,  you  append  one  
of the following phrases (substi-
tuting your deity’s name for Pelor):
    “. . . as Pelor’s grace demands.”
“. . . just as Pelor sweeps aside foes.”
    “. . . so that Pelor may smile upon us.”
“. . . in Pelor’s name, let it be so.”
    “. . . in this we ask Pelor’s aid.”
“. . . and in so doing we will be instruments of Pelor’s peace.”
    “. . . and in this we shall have Pelor’s divine aid.”
“. . . for behold, Pelor has smiled on us from the very beginning.”
    “. . . and may all sin in Pelor’s eyes be washed from our souls, so 
that our purposes are pure.”
Jozan, High Priest of Pelor
Illus. by H. Lyon
620_95374_Ch2.indd   36620_95374_Ch2.indd   362/8/06   3:10:18 PM2/8/06   3:10:18 PM

37
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
 Sermonizer: You are familiar with the trials and travails 
of your deity, especially if your god or one of his saints or 
other associated entities was forced to undergo a great trial 
to reach a higher spiritual understanding or vision.
    You are given to dropping in bits and pieces of this story 
pr ior to ex pressing your point. You hope that by being made 
aware of holy example, your companions will see the wisdom 
of your words.
    For instance, you might say as part of your arguments 
(substituting your deity’s name for Pelor):
    “. . . but as the One Hundred Writs of Pelor tell us . . .”
    “. . . lest we suffer as Pelor suffered in his many trials . . .”
     “. . . but even the purest hearts can fall. Remember Eyria, the 
devoted paladin of Pelor? Renowned for her piety and courage, 
she was slain in battle with a death knight, but in her destruction 
she was victorious.”
     “. . . long before you were born and long after you’ve become but 
dust,  Pelor’s  disciples  will  continue  their  good  works  and  see  to  it  
that Pelor’s will is accomplished.
 Soldier of Divinity: You stand a little closer to the paladin 
ideal than other clerics. You disdain blessings and prayers, 
and you avoid healing your compatriots except in the direst 
of circumstances. Instead, you select your spells, feats, and 
magic items so that your deity’s divine grace directly infuses 
your strength at arms and defense. If you pray for just the 
right combination of aid, your ability to fight your god’s 
battles comes close to equaling any warrior’s combat ability, 
and in some cases exceeds those capabilities.
     Of course, being a soldier of your deity doesn’t mean that 
you can’t be prayerful (see above), though your pleas to your 
god take on a much more military context:
    “Move, infi del, or feel divine wrath.”
    “Kill them all, Pelor commands it!”
SPONTANEOUS DOMAIN CASTING
After a while, clerics can start looking very similar. Even with a 
variety of domains to choose from, domain spells take up such 
a small portion of the average cleric’s repertoire that they don’t 
have much ef fect on the overal l feel of the character. With spon-
taneous domain casting, though, your domain choice becomes 
a more important element of your character. You won’t be able 
to provide as much healing to your party as a typical cleric, but 
the ability to prepare cure or infl ict spells in your domain spell 
slots keeps you from falling too far behind in that area.
 Level: 1st.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the ability to spontaneously convert prepared spells into cure 
or infl ict spells.
 Benefi  t:  You can convert stored spell energy into the spells 
of one of your domains. Pick one of your two domains. You can 
“lose” any prepared spell (other than a domain spell) to cast any 
spell of the same level or lower on that domain list. Your choice 
is permanent unless an alignment change, deity change, or other 
dramatic event leaves you incapable of accessing the domain.
    In addition, when preparing spells you can choose to fi ll 
any or all of your domain spell slots with either cure or infl ict 
spells (depending on whether you would normally convert 
prepared spells to cure or infl ict spells) of the same level.
 Example: Crucius is a cleric of Heironeous with the Good 
and War domains. At 1st level, he chooses to spontaneously 
cast War domain spells. Thereafter, he can lose a prepared 
1st-level spell to cast magic weapon, a prepared 2nd-level spell 
to cast spiritual weapon (or magic weapon), and so on. Further-
more, in each domain spell slot he can prepare a spell from 
the Good domain, a spell from the War domain, or a cure spell 
of the same level.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Defender
Dwarf Cleric of Moradin
     Ability     Scores:     Str 12, Dex 8, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 11.
    Skills:    Concentration, Knowledge (religion).
     Feat:     Improved Turning.
     Weap o ns :     Morningstar (1d8), light crossbow with 20 bolts 
(1d8/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, wooden holy symbol, 2 gp.
     Class     Features:     Channels positive energy; Good and Protec-
tion domains.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—command, protection from evil
D
, shield of 
faith; 0—detect magic, light, resistance.
    D: Domain spell.
Package 2: The Destroyer
Half-Orc Cleric of Heironeous
     Ability     Scores:     Str 16, Dex 10, Con 12, Int 6, Wis 15, Cha 11.
    Skill:    Concentration.
     Feats:     Divine Justice*, Martial Weapon Profi  ciency  (long-
sword), Weapon Focus (longsword).
     Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d8/19–20), 2 javelins (1d6, 20 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, wooden holy symbol, 5 gp.
    Class    Features:    Channels  positive  energy;  Good  and  War  
(longsword) domains.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—bless,  divine  favor,  magic  weapon
D
; 
0—guidance, resistance, virtue.
    D: Domain spell.
Package 3: The Healer
Human Cleric of Pelor
     Ability     Scores:     Str 14, Dex 8, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 15, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Concentration, Diplomacy, Heal.
     Feats:     Combat Casting, Sacred Healing*.
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d8/×3), light crossbow with 20 bolts 
(1d8/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, wooden holy symbol, 12 gp.
    Class    Features:    Channels  positive  energy;  Healing  and  
Sun domains.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—endure  elements
D
, protection  from  evil,  
sanctuary; 0—detect magic, detect poison, light.
    D: Domain spell.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   37620_95374_Ch2.indd   372/8/06   3:10:27 PM2/8/06   3:10:27 PM

38
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
DRUID
Your secret instruction occurred in caves and forests sacred 
to life. You learned clandestine verses, the names of stars 
and constellations, the cycle of the seasons, sacred songs, 
formulas for prayers and incantations, rules of divination 
and magic, and the language of animals. To this day, you 
still  learn;  as  a  druid,  you  are  a  lifelong  student  of  the  
natural world.
     Why isn’t everyone? After witnessing the fury of a storm, 
the splendor of the setting sun, and the spirit-cleansing 
power  of  a  grove  of  aspen  trees,  only  the  most  stone-
hearted would not be moved to protect and conserve them, 
and what’s more, rejoice and cherish the slow-growing, 
natural elements of the world that form the foundation 
of everything else. Without the web of sun, rain, growth, 
death, and rebirth in nature, the vaunted civilizations of 
men, elves, dwarves, and other creatures would crumble 
like dust.
    Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Ascetic, Farm Hand, 
Tribal Origin.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Crusader, 
Explorer, Innocent, Martyr, Orphan, Prophet, Renegade, 
Sage, Savage, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Conservationist: You espouse a philosophy you like 
to call the “conservation ethic.” The conservation ethic 
promotes the measured use, allotment, and protection of 
natural lands and waters. You employ your ethic as an aid in 
your efforts to sustain the natural world: its forests, lakes, 
seas, and all the strange and wondrous creatures that live 
within it.
    In order to engender a similar ethic in your companions 
and others that you meet, you offer poetic references to nature 
when traveling, when fi rst seeing a new vista, or when you 
otherwise deem appropriate:
    “Spend a heartbeat and notice every waving leaf, every tendril 
of mist in the dark woods, and every humming insect.”
    “The deer, the wolf, the oak, the fi sh, and the great birds are our 
fellows, and they can be wronged, just as you can be wronged.”
     “An unchecked and untempered appetite will devour green plains 
and leave behind only a barren wasteland.”
     “What soul can’t fi nd peace and spiritual renewal in the forlorn 
cry of the whippoorwill or the arguments of the frogs around a pond 
at night?”
    “Whatever happens to the wild places, the pure waters, and 
the teeming beasts soon happens to us. An invisible web connects 
all things.”
 Friend of Animals: Small and relatively defenseless ani-
mals have no greater friend than you. While you know that 
nature is not merciful, and that the weak and old are destined 
to be food for young, strong predators, you also know that 
mercy can selectively apply to nature.
     To this end you know by sight dozens, if not hundreds, of 
individual small animals such as birds, gophers, and rabbits. 
You don’t bore your humanoid companions with all the 
names you’ve given all the little creatures that you recognize, 
unless asked.
     You always carry with you a small bag in which you keep 
crumbs, old bones, jerky, grain, thistle, or other treats that 
animals  enjoy,  and  leave  them  as  small  offerings  when  
convenient.
     “See that one? Hawks rarely live as long as Shr ieker. He’s a tough 
old bird.”
    “Sometimes my friends fi nd me around the campfi re at night, 
and tell me stories of their day.”
 Hunter: You are displeased when those who should know 
better exploit nature. But you retain a burning hatred for 
those things that are nature’s bane by virtue of their mere 
existence; you hate that which is unnatural, including aber-
rations (such as beholders and carrion crawlers) and undead 
(such as zombies and vampires).
    From time to time, you lead raids against such creatures, 
especially when they encroach on natural wonders and lands 
that you revere. Even while such creatures are still contained, 
it is better to excise them before they can cause damage to 
the natural world, rather than wait for the damage to happen 
as it inevitably will.
    Undead in particular have no connection to nature—
they exist apart from it, a mockery of the normal cycles 
of life. Nature cries out each moment they are suffered 
to exist.
    “Those not of creation deserve no part in it.”
     “This  aberration’s  body  must  be  displayed  as  a  warning  to  
the others.”
 Judge: You are the guardian of unwritten ancient laws 
inspired by nature. As someone with such knowledge, you 
believe you have the power to judge those who have sinned 
against the natural order. When you judge, you can sentence 
the malefactor to be excommunicated from sacred groves, 
the deep woods, and all other places where nature still 
reigns supreme.
     To the extent you are able to communicate your judgments 
to other druids, wild animals, treants, and other creatures of 
the wild, your judgments stand. Of course, the easiest way 
to ensure your judgment is to take matters into your own 
hands against those who have sinned most heinously (such 
as undead, through their mere existence).
    In most cases, other druids are willing to abide by your 
judgments, if you show through your actions that you are 
willing to abide by theirs.
     However, no civilized court of law, whether a council of 
village elders or a king’s tribunal, recognizes the right of 
druids and their judgments. That’s all right with you—neither 
do you recognize their right over sovereign nature.
    “Primeval justice is the fi rst arbiter and fi nal authority.”
    “The laws of man pale before the law of nature.”
 Philosopher: Nature is red in tooth and claw, regardless 
of what the sentimental philosophies of so-called civiliza-
tion might claim. To truly cherish all life, you embrace the 
fact that bad things and good are all part of the evolving 
environment. When events unfold that seem initially bad or 
ruinous, you philosophically attempt to provide perspective 
to your companions.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   38620_95374_Ch2.indd   382/8/06   3:10:34 PM2/8/06   3:10:34 PM

39
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
“In the landscape of spring, there is neither better nor worse. The 
fl owering branches grow naturally, some long, some short.”
“Nature’s tranquility comes like a fresh wind that blows away 
cares like autumn leaves.”
“There are no sermons in stones. It is easier to get a spark out of 
a stone than a moral.”
    “We cannot command nature except by obeying her.”
“Nature teaches us to either adapt or perish.”
     Teacher:  Unlike  many  druids,  who  can  come  
across as sullen and rough (albeit steadfast in 
their beliefs), you enjoy teaching others just 
why it is so impor tant that nat ure have a 
protector such as yourself. After all, it 
is not obvious to the casual observer 
that life exists only through a 
subtle  connection  and  deep  
interaction  with  all  other  
living things.
    Think about it—where 
does the food you eat come 
from? We eat meat, and 
we eat greens. If we kill 
all  the  meat  animals,  or  
the land where the ani-
mals graze, what are you 
going  to  eat?  If  we  build  
over  all  the  farms  with  
sprawling cities, who is go-
ing  to  grow  your  potatoes  
and barley?”
     “There  is  power  in  nature  
apart  from  what  magic  or  
resources we can extract from 
it. Sure, a grove of trees will build 
a house—but it can also house 
a spirit.”
     “Consider the herders and shep-
herds who conserve their cattle 
and  sheep  from  season  to  season,  
extracting milk, wool, and even meat 
while ensuring the health of the overall herd. 
It is no different with the plains, forests, and lakes. 
We need to be tree stewards, grass shepherds, and 
lake wardens if we want to continue to enjoy the 
bounty nature provides year after year.”
     Star     Watcher:     You spend so much time in the wild that 
you recognize the stars and constellations of the night sky 
as easily as you note the smell of fl ame on the wind or the 
spoor of a mountain cat about to give birth.
     You  know  the  various  epicycles  and  positions  of  the  
celestial bodies, but more important, you hold that your 
knowledge of the positions of stars, comets, moons, and 
planets is useful in understanding, interpreting, and organiz-
ing knowledge about what has come before, what’s going 
on now, and what will one day come to pass. You like to 
say to your companions concer ning your predi lection for 
the stars:
“. . . by looking up I see downward.”
    In addition, you make a point to see the stars at least 
once a week, and more often if possible. If you are pre-
vented from seeing the open sky, you at least have your 
personally  constructed  star  chart,  a  scroll  of  paper  on  
which  you’ve  inked  the  various  stars,  planets,  and  oth-
er celestial bodies important to you. You 
can while away long hours poring 
over  your  charts  and  drawing  
complicated designs meant to 
unleash your intuitive side, so 
that visions of the future might 
become clear.
    “I saw a comet once that was 
part of no star chart I had stud-
ied.  I  named  it  after  my  
secret desire.”
    “The stars are wise be-
yond all else. They looked 
on  as  this  world  formed,  
and they’ll look on after this 
world has run through its history 
to the end.”
SPONTANEOUS 
REJUVENATION
By selecting the spontaneous reju-
venation alternative class feature, 
you  can  provide  the  party  with  
plenty  of  healing  without  tram-
pling on the cleric’s role.
  Level: 1st.
Replaces: If you select this 
class  feature,  you  do  not  gain  the  
ability  to  spontaneously  convert  
prepared  spells  into  summon  nature’s  
ally spells.
  Benefi  t: You can transform the stored 
energy  of  a  spell  you  have  prepared  to  
invigorate you and your allies.
        To  use  spontaneous  rejuvenation,  you  
must spend a standard action and sacrifice a 
prepared spell. All allies within 30 feet of you 
(including  yourself )  gain  fast  healing  for  3  
rounds. The fast healing amount is equal to the 
spell’s level. For example, if you sacrifi  ce  remove disease, a 3rd-
level spell, each ally gains fast healing 3 for 3 rounds.
     The fast healing granted by this class feature doesn’t stack 
with itself or with fast healing from other sources.
SHAPESHIFT
Taking the shapeshift alternative class feature means you can 
focus on your actions in combat (rather than wor r y ing about 
your animal companion) whi le sti l l unleashing nat ure’s fur y 
upon your foes.
 Level: 1st.
Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
an animal companion at 1st level, nor do you gain the wild 
shape class feature at 5th level (or any variation of that class 
Va d a n i a ,   h i e r o p ha n t   d r u i d   
of the Tall Forest
Illus. by R. Spencer
620_95374_Ch2.indd   39620_95374_Ch2.indd   392/8/06   3:10:41 PM2/8/06   3:10:41 PM

40
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
feature at later levels, such as the ability to wild shape into 
an elemental at 16th level).
 Benefi  t:  You can shapeshift at will into powerful animal 
or nat ure-or iented for ms. Each time you use this abi l it y, you 
can choose the exact look that your shapeshifted form takes. 
Druids pick animals from the terrain and climate they’re most 
familiar with. For example, a druid from a jungle might adopt 
the form of a black panther when in predator form, while one 
from the taiga might shapeshift into a white wolf. The two 
forms look different, but functionally they’re identical. This 
is a supernatural ability.
    It requires only a swift action to shapeshift. If you are 
capable of taking more than one form, you can shapeshift 
directly between two forms without returning to your normal 
form. There’s no limit to the number of times per day you 
can change forms, nor to the amount of time you can spend 
in a shapeshifted form.
     You  retain  your  normal  Hit  Dice,  hit  points,  base  attack  
bonus, base saving throw bonuses, and skill ranks regardless 
of your form. You also retain your normal ability scores, 
though each form grants a bonus to your Strength score.
     You  keep  all  extraordinary,  supernatural,  and  spell-like  
special attacks and qualities of your normal form, except for 
those requiring a body part your new form does not have.
    All your held, carried, or worn gear melds into your new 
form and becomes nonfunctional until you return to your 
normal  form.  You  cannot  speak  in  shapeshifted  form,  and  
your limbs lack the precision required to wield a weapon or 
perform  tasks  requiring  fi  ne  manipulation.  You  can’t  cast  
spells  or  activate  magic  items  while  in  shapeshifted  form,  
even if you have the Natural Spell feat or other ability that 
would allow you to cast spells while wild shaped.
     Unless  otherwise  noted  in  the  descriptions  below,  you  
retain your size and space when you adopt a new form. You 
always retain your type and subtypes, regardless of the nature 
of the form assumed. You don’t gain any special attacks or 
qualities while shapeshifted except as described below.
     When  you  shapeshift  into  a  form  other  than  your  own,  
you  gain  natural  weapons  (and  reach  with  those  weapons)  
as described below. These natural weapons gain an enhance-
ment  bonus  on  attack  rolls  and  damage  rolls  equal  to  1/4  
your druid level, and at 4th level and higher they are treated 
as  magic  weapons  for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  damage  
reduction.  The  damage  dice  given  are  for  Medium  druids;  
smal ler or larger dr uids should adjust those values according 
to the table on page 28 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide.
     If knocked unconscious or slain in shapeshifted form, you 
revert to your original form.
 Predator  Form:  This  form,  traditionally  that  of  a  wolf,  
panther, or other predatory mammal, is the fi  rst one a shape-
shifting druid learns.
     While  in  predator  form,  you  gain  a  primary  bite  attack  
that deals 1d6 points of damage. You have the reach of a long 
creature of your size (5 feet for Small or Medium). You gain a 
+4 enhancement bonus to Strength, and your natural armor 
bonus improves by 4. Your base land speed becomes 50 feet.
     At 4th level, you gain Mobility as a bonus feat whenever you 
are in predator form (even if you don’t meet the prerequisites).
 Aerial Form: At 5th level, you can shapeshift into a fl ying 
creature. Traditionally resembling an eagle, vulture, or bat, 
the aerial form enables fast travel and the ability to soar out 
of harm’s way.
     While in aerial form, you gain a primary talon attack that 
deals 1d6 points of damage. You have the reach of a long crea-
ture of your size (5 feet for Small or Medium). You gain a +2 
enhancement bonus to Strength and a +2 enhancement bonus 
on Refl  ex saves, and your natural armor bonus improves by 
2. You gain a fl  y speed of 40 feet (good maneuverability).
     At 7th level, you gain Flyby Attack as a bonus feat whenever 
you are in aerial form.
 Ferocious Slayer Form: At 8th level, you can shapeshift into 
a large and fi  erce predatory form, such as a tiger, brown bear, 
or dire wolf.
     While in ferocious slayer form, you gain a primary bite attack 
that deals 1d8 points of damage and two secondary claw attacks 
that each deal 1d6 points of damage. Your size increases by one 
category (to a maximum of Colossal), and you have the reach of 
a long creature of your size (5 feet for Medium or Large). You 
gain a +8 enhancement bonus to Strength and a +4 enhance-
ment bonus on Fortitude saves, and your natural armor bonus 
improves by 8. Your base land speed changes to 40 feet.
    At 10th level, you gain Improved Critical (bite) and 
Improved Critical (claw) as bonus feats whenever you are in 
ferocious slayer form.
 Forest Avenger Form: At 12th level, you can take the form of 
a massive plantlike creature, similar to a shambling mound 
or a treant. (Druids not native to forest terrains typically 
rename this form to fi  t their environment.)
    While in forest avenger form, you gain a pair of primary 
slam attacks that deal 1d8 points of damage each. Your size 
increases by one category (to a maximum of Colossal) and 
you have the reach of a tall creature of your size (5 feet for 
Medium,  10  feet  for  Large).  You  gain  a  +12  enhancement  
bonus to Strength and a +4 enhancement bonus on Fortitude 
and Will saves, and your natural armor bonus improves by 
12. Your base land speed becomes 20 feet.
    You gain damage reduction 5/slashing while in forest 
avenger form.
    At 14th level, you gain Improved Overrun as a bonus feat 
while  in  forest  avenger  form  (even  if  you  don’t  meet  the  
normal prerequisites).
 Elemental Fury Form: At 16th level, you can shapeshi ft into 
a giant form of air, earth, fi  re, or water (your choice each time 
you shapeshift).
    While in elemental fury form, you gain a pair of primary 
slam attacks that deal 2d6 points of damage each. Your size 
increases by two categories (to a maximum of Colossal), and 
you have the reach of a tall creature of your size (10 feet for 
Large, 15 feet for Huge). You gain a +16 enhancement bonus to 
Strength and a +4 enhancement bonus on Fortitude, Refl  ex,  
and Will saves, and your natural armor bonus improves by 16. 
You do not gain any new modes of movement in elemental 
fury form, nor does your base land speed change.
     You gain immunit y to ex tra damage from cr itical hits whi le 
in elemental form. You also gain immunity to an energy type 
related to the element chosen (air = electricity, earth = acid, 
620_95374_Ch2.indd   40620_95374_Ch2.indd   402/13/06   11:21:33 AM2/13/06   11:21:33 AM

41
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
fi re = fi re, water = cold). You don’t need to breathe while in 
elemental fury form.
    At 18th level, you gain Great Cleave as a bonus feat while 
in elemental fury form (even if you don’t meet the normal 
prerequisites).
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Beastmaster
Halfl ing Druid
    Ability    Scores:    Str 8, Dex 14, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Handle Animal, Ride, Survival.
 Languages: Common, Druidic, Halfl  ing.
     Feat:     Animal Affi  nity.
     Weap o ns :     Longspear  (1d6/×3),  sling  with  20  bullets  (1d3,  
50 ft.).
    Armor:    Hide (+3 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 9 gp, 8 sp.
    Class    Feature:    Riding dog animal companion.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—cure  light  wounds,  speak  with  animals;  
0—cure minor wounds (2), detect magic.
Package 2: The Feral Beast
Elf Druid
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 10.
    Skills:    Listen, Spot, Survival.
 Languages: Common, Druidic, Elven.
     Feat: Alertness.
     Weap o n:     Spear (1d8/×3), sling with 20 bullets (1d4, 50 ft.).
    Armor:    Hide (+3 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 12 gp, 8 sp.
    Class    Feature:    Hawk animal companion.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—cure light wounds, longstrider; 0—cure 
minor wounds, know direction, light.
Package 3: The Warden
Human Druid
     Ability     Scores:     Str 10, Dex 12, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 13.
     Skills:     Concentration, Knowledge (nature), Spot, Survival.
 Languages: Common, Druidic.
     Feats:     Augment Summoning, Spell Focus (conjuration).
     Weap o ns :     Scimitar (1d6/18–20), sling with 20 bullets (1d4, 
50 ft.).
    Armor:    Leather (+2 AC), light wooden shield (+1 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 1 gp, 8 sp.
    Class    Feature:    Wolf animal companion.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—cure light wounds, entangle; 0—cure 
minor wounds, detect magic, fl are.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
1st Level
Badger
Brixashulty†
RW
Camel
Caribou
F
Chordevoc†
RW
Climbdog
AE
Dire rat
Dog
Dog, riding
Eagle
Hawk
Horse, light
Horse, heavy
Jackal
S
Owl
Pony
Serval
S
Snake, Small viper
Snake, Medium viper
Swindlespitter
M3
Vulture
S
Wolf
†Halfling druids only
4th Level (–3)
Ape
Axebeak
AE
Badger, dire
Bat, dire
Bear, black
Bison
Boar
Brixashulty†
RW
Cheetah
Chordevoc†
RW
Fleshraker
3
Hawk, dire††
M2, RW$
Jackal, dire
S
Leopard
Lizard, monitor
Snake, constrictor
Snake, Large viper
Toad, dire
M2
Weasel, dire
Wolverine
†Nonhalfling druids only
††Raptoran druids only
7th Level (–6)
Ape, dire
Ankylosaurus, cave
MH
Bear, brown
Boar, dire
Crocodile, giant
Deinonychus
Eagle, dire
RS
Hawk, dire††
M2, RW$
Lion
Megaloceros
F
Protoceratops
S
Rhinoceros
Snake, Huge viper
Terror bird
FF
Tiger
Wolf, dire
Wolverine, dire
††Nonraptoran  druids  
only
10th Level (–9)
Allosaurus
M2, A$
Bear, polar 
Bloodstriker
M3
Glyptodon
F
Hippopotamus
S
Horse, dire
M2
Lion, dire
Megaraptor
Puma, dire
S
Snake, dire
M2
Snake, giant constrictor
Tiger, saber-toothed
F
Tortoise, dire
S
Triceratops, cave
MH
Tyrannosaurus, cave
MH
Vulture, dire
S
13th Level (–12)
Ankylosaurus
M2, A$
Bear, dire
Diprotodon
S
Elephant
Elk, dire
M2
Fhorge
FF
Lizard, giant banded
S
16th Level (–15)
Bear, dire polar
F
Elephant, dire
M2
Hippopotamus, dire
S
Indricothere
FF
Mammoth, woolly
F
*
Mastodon
M3
Mastodon, grizzly
M2
Megatherium
FF
Quetzalcoatlus
M2, A$
Rhinoceros, dire
FF
Tiger, dire
Triceratops
Tyrannosaurus
*Listed  in  previous  source  
as  available  at  a  different  
level.
A: See D&D v.3.5 Accessory 
Update for new statistics
AE: Arms &  Equipment  
Guide
F: Frostburn
FF: Fiend Folio
M2: Monster Manual II
M3: Monster Manual III
MH: Miniatures Handbook
RS: Races of Stone
RW: Races of the Wild
S: Sandstorm
ANIMAL COMPANIONS
The list below is a compilation of all terrestrial animals eligible to 
be chosen as animal companions, organized by minimum druid 
level required. Apply the parenthetical adjustment to the druid’s 
level for purposes of determining the companion’s characteris-
tics and special abilities.
    If the campaign takes place wholly or partly in an aquatic envi-
ronment, consult Stormwrack for a list of additional appropriate 
animal companions.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   41620_95374_Ch2.indd   412/13/06   11:21:37 AM2/13/06   11:21:37 AM

42
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
FAVOR ED   SOU L
You are a free agent of your deity, unfettered by the strictures 
of a clerical hierarchy. You wander from place to place, wield-
ing your power to advance the causes you deem worthy in the 
eyes of your god, or else you choose a great crusade against 
that which offends your deity, requiring a lifelong commit-
ment and unswerving purpose. While the cleric comes to his 
power through study and discipline, you are the recipient of 
a great gift—or, as some perceive it, a terrible curse. How you 
wield the divine power burning in your heart is up to you.
    This class appears in the Complete Divine supplement.
    Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Ascetic, Drifter, Noble 
Scion.
    Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Companion, Cru-
sader, Innocent, Martyr, Prophet, Seeker, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
Mystic:  You  aspire  to  the  
divine  in  every  aspect  of  
your life. The difficulties 
and dangers around you are 
only temporary; you keep 
your  eyes  fi rmly fi  xed  on  
matters of the spirit, which 
are all that truly matter. You 
have little interest in wealth, 
fame, or creature comforts, 
since these things are tran-
sitory too. Instead, you seek 
enlightenment,  understand-
ing, and spiritual growth.
     Some might see you as obliv-
ious or irrational, but those are 
unfair  characterizations.  You  
simply have the ability to look 
past  fear,  pain,  and  suffering  
to the eternal rewards that will 
surely follow. You possess moral 
and physical courage in abundance, 
because you do not fear death or in-
jury. You don’t go out of your way to 
get hurt or killed, of course, but there 
is no point in fearing pain or death when 
you know that your spirit will survive.
     While your comrades might not always ap-
preciate your detachment from matters of the 
physical world, you are compassionate (or care-
ful, at least, if you are evil) and fearless. Nothing 
discourages you.
     Seek out adventures for the right reasons—aiding others, 
gaining knowledge, advancing the cause of your deity, or (if 
you are not good) hardening your soul and accruing power 
for the day when you leave your fl  eshly existence behind. 
Monetary  gain  for  its  own  sake  interests  you  little,  but  
the growth you experience in taking on any challenging 
experience—such as recovering an ancient treasure—means 
that you do not necessarily spurn your companions’ quests 
for material gain.
     When circumstances permit, contemplate decisions care-
fully. You are not given to hasty action or impetuousness. Even 
in combat, you remain calm and deliberate. Speak slowly and 
thoughtfully; avoid undue excitement. When you encourage 
your friends, remind them that very little in the world around 
them has the power to do them true and lasting injury.
     “Courage,  friends;  all  this  has  happened  before,  and  will  
happen again.”
    “Pain is illusory! It exists only in the mind.”
“True strength lies within.”
    “Death is a doorway, nothing more. Fear it not.”
Prophet: The hand of a deity is upon you, and you are not 
always in control of your words or actions. From time to time 
you give yourself over completely to the will of your deity, 
and say or do things that you had no intention of saying or 
doing. Dr iven by impulses you cannot control or understand, 
you might be capable of aston-
ishing acts of courage or aw ful 
treachery—it all depends on 
the whim of your deity.
 When you play a prophetic 
character, you do not surren-
der control of your character 
to the Dungeon Master. How-
ever, you should ask your DM 
to look for the occasional op-
portunity  to  communicate  
unusual  information  through  
your character’s words or actions. 
When confronting an evil lord, 
your comrades might be inclined 
to guard their words and avoid a 
fi  ght in the middle of his castle—
but  the  prophet  might  suddenly  
blaze forth with a ringing condem-
nation of the lord’s secret wickedness, 
possibly  enumerating  crimes  you  
and the other players had no direct 
knowledge of beforehand.
    Even if your Dungeon Master 
does not provide you with ex cathe-
dra material for the game session, you 
should listen to your intuition. Don’t 
watch  your  words  and  don’t  rethink  
impetuous actions. Take these impulses as 
signs that your character is caught in the grip of 
her deity, and let the chips fall where they may.
 Work w ith your Dungeon Master to create a few 
interesting prophecies for the campaign. The best 
prophecies are ones that can come true in unexpected ways.
    “The third moon draws nigh; beware!”
“One of you will fall tonight.”
    “We shall triumph, and yet we shall fail.”
“I cannot see all that follows from the deeds of this day.”
 Scourge of Unbelievers: You are your deity’s chosen 
instrument of vengeance, punishment, and righteous wrath. 
Sorra the blessed
Illus. by E. Fiegenschuh
620_95374_Ch2.indd   42620_95374_Ch2.indd   422/8/06   3:11:04 PM2/8/06   3:11:04 PM

43
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
It falls to you to defend the innocent and harry the iniqui-
tous. You are driven, never able to rest as long as your deity’s 
enemies remain at large. Since you have an inclusive view of 
who might be considered an enemy of your deit y, that means 
you rarely rest at all.
    Examine your deity’s alignment, description, and dogma 
or credo and create a list of the creatures or people you need 
to smite fi  rst. Anybody not on that list is irrelevant . . . unless, 
of course, they can be recruited as allies in your ongoing 
crusade. When your adventures pit you against foes that your 
deity has no special distaste for, you chafe for the opportunity 
to fi nish up and return to what’s truly important: bringing 
the wrath of your deity down upon his or her enemies.
     You are frequently inspired to scream or snarl imprecations, 
letting your foes know exactly who you are and exactly why 
you are punishing them.
    “Pelor’s light will sear you, spawn of darkness!”
    “Pelor commands your destruction, infi del!”
     “Naught shall avail you against the might of Pelor, demon! I will 
hurl you screaming back into the Abyss!”
DEITY’S FAVOR
The favored soul enjoys the fl  exibility of spontaneous spellcast-
ing, but her limited spell selection can hinder her ability to 
provide the healing expected from a divine caster. Choosing 
the deity’s favor class feature means you’ll be a bit less potent 
in combat, but lets you use the spells you’re already casting to 
help you and your allies last longer in a fi  ght. Favored souls who 
choose this option should ex pect a lot of requests for suppor t 
spells such as bless, bull’s strength, and prayer, but remember 
that your cure spells gain this benefi  t as well.
 Level: 3rd.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the deity’s weapon focus or deity’s weapon specialization 
class features (you still gain profi ciency with your deity’s 
favored weapon).
 Benefi  t: Beginning at 3rd level, whenever you cast a favored 
soul spell, you can choose any one ally affected by that spell 
(including yourself ) to gain temporary hit points equal to three 
times  the  spell’s  level.  These  temporary  hit  points  last  for  up  
to 1 minute per level of the spell. If the spell would also grant 
temporary hit points, use only the larger value and its duration.
     If you use this ability on a creature that is still under the effect of 
a previous use, the new temporary hit points overlap (do not stack 
with) the temporary hit points the creature had remaining.
    Beginning at 12th level, you can choose to grant these tem-
porary hit points to any number of allies affected by the spell.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Defender
Dwarf Favored Soul of Moradin
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 10, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 12.
    Skills:    Concentration.
     Feat: Shield Specialization* (heavy).
     Weap o n:     Warhammer (1d8/×3), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 31 gp.
Package 2: The Healer
Halfl ing Favored Soul of Yondalla
     Ability     Scores:     Str 12, Dex 12, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Heal.
     Feat: Spontaneous Healer (Complete Divine).
     Weap o ns :     Short sword (1d4/19–20), fi  ve javelins (1d4, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 33 gp.
Package 3: The Vanguard
Human Favored Soul of Kord
     Ability     Scores:     Str 14, Dex 10, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Concentration,    Diplomacy.
     Feats:     Combat Casting, Combat Focus*.
     Weap o ns :     Greatsword (1d12/19–20), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Spell component pouch, standard adventur-
er’s kit.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
MAKING A PROPHECY
What’s  the  point  of  being  a  prophet  if  you  never  get  anything  
right? The trick in creating a prophecy is to bury it in symbols 
or  metaphors  that,  after  the  fact,  become  perfectly  obvious.  
The more specific you are, the more likely it is that you will get 
something wrong.
    Don’t use names, use titles. Instead of saying, “King Derath 
of Veronia,” say something like, “Veronia’s lord”—or better yet, 
“the Lion of Veronia,” or even “the Lion of the East.”
    Don’t use dates that occur once; use times of year, seasons, 
or celestial events. So, instead of saying “March 15th of the year 
635,”  say  something  like  “beneath  the  third  moon,”  or  “when  
winter’s grip weakens in the fifth year.”
    Use metaphors instead of clear statements. Don’t say “dies,” 
or “is killed;” say “falls into darkness,” “stands before his fathers,” 
or “goes into the night.”
    Add a random, unconnected remark, such as “The traitor sees 
it all,” or “Now the door stands open to the night.”
Here’s an example:
    When rises the red moon above the North,
    The Lion of Veronia ceases his roar.
    Three times three are the slain.
    Rose petals fall from the elf maiden’s hands.
These images could mean almost anything. The red moon might 
be a specific season or celestial phenomena, or a metaphor for 
“war.” The Lion of Veronia might be its king or a Veronian-born 
hero.  The  rose  petals  could  be  flowers  strewn  on  a  grave,  or  
perhaps drops of blood—so was the elf maiden grieving for the 
slain, or was she actually their murderer? It worked for Nostrada-
mus; you can make it work for you.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   43620_95374_Ch2.indd   432/8/06   3:11:14 PM2/8/06   3:11:14 PM

44
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
FIGHTER
You are an adventuring opportunist, willing to go wherever 
the next fi ght leads you. You’ll take up quests, you’ll accept 
commissions, and you’ll even consider taking on leadership 
roles, as long as you can practice your warrior’s craft. You 
know fi  ghting—none know it better. Other combatants with 
exotic martial styles or those who mix spells with swords 
obscure what is most important—who’s the best? Who can 
put their sword in an enemy’s guts fi rst? You, that’s who. 
You are a straight-up, no-nonsense person, and you know 
the value of your hard-won, long practiced skills. While you 
take great risks in hopes of receiving an equally big payout, 
for you the thrill of combat is at least as compelling as the 
loot at adventure’s end.
     The  alternative  class  features  presented  here  provide  
alternatives to the traditional full attack routine. The fi  ghter  
who takes one or more of these options seeks the fl  exibility  
to alter his tactics based on the situation he faces. Against 
a foe that has a high AC or damage reduction, trading less 
useful second, third, or fourth attacks for tangible benefi ts 
represents a signifi  cant boon to the fi  ghter.
    Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Gladiator, Guttersnipe, 
Noble Scion, Soldier.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Challenger, Com-
panion, Leader, Martyr, Mercenary, Orphan, Rebel, Renegade, 
Royalty, Seeker, Simple Soul, Strategist, Theorist.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Comrade  in  Arms:  In  a  fi  ght,  your  best  weapons  are  
your friends. Your skill in arms can get you only so far, but 
without a friend to screen attacks while you drink down 
a potion of curing and an ally with whom you can fl  ank  a  
monster, your ability to win in the face of any odds would 
be  greatly  diminished.  Though  you’re  not  ordinarily  a  
sentimental person, the bonds of warfare link you with 
your  companions,  and  you  consider  them  brothers  and  
sisters to a signifi  cant degree. You regularly put yourself in 
harm’s way for their sake, and you like to believe they’d do 
the same for you.
    “We can take them if we work as a team!”
     “I’ll charge straight in--you take the left fl  ank, and you the right. 
And how about some archery to distract them?”
 Formally Trained: Unlike many fighters, you have a 
special pedigree—your skill in the craft comes from formal 
training in an academy. Your academy training imparted 
to you all the right-of-way rules in regard to attacks and 
defenses, should you ever be called upon to fi ght in a noble 
tournament, as opposed to the desperate battles below the 
ground in which you usually fi  nd yourself embroiled.
    You know all the proper terms for swordsmanship, and 
know that all blades fall into four major categories: foils, 
epees,  sabers,  and  longswords  (which  are  either  one-  or  
two-handed affairs). Your knowledge of all the specializa-
tions and names of the thousands of blade types is nearly 
encyclopedic, especially with regard to the more obscure 
types of blades utilized by swordsmen of distant countries. 
While this knowledge has little practical application, you 
do enjoy showing it off to your companions.
    “The difference between the bokuto, a wooden training sword, 
and the suburito is actually very small—the suburito is slightly 
heaver.”
     “The dao is like a saber—but the dao lacks a hand guard, which 
somewhat limits your options in a fi ght.”
    “If it’s a sword, it has a tip, a blade, a fuller, and a hilt made up 
of the guard, grip, and pommel.”
     “A fuller? A fuller is a rounded groove on the fl at side of a blade. 
Although  sometimes  called  ‘blood  grooves,’  their  purpose  is  really  
to lighten the blade.”
    “Kukri is actually pronounced khu-khoo-ree.”
 Practice Makes Perfect: For you, daily exercise is more 
than something to get your blood running—you see it as a 
requirement of your craft. With fi rst light, you’re up doing 
pushups, stomach crunches, running in place, and then the 
all-important swordplay, whether with a comrade or practic-
ing  forms  on  your  own.  Afterward,  you  spend  time  oiling  
your equipment against rust and sun, and of course give your 
blade a little time with the whetstone. You certainly won’t 
go more than a week without your practice, and you prefer 
a daily regimen.
 Self-Taught: Your academy was the street, and your craft 
is unpolished but well tested. You don’t know and don’t care 
for all the “jargon” a few who claim to be warriors spout. You 
know swords, you know bows—you know how to use them, 
who cares what they’re called? The information doesn’t help 
you in a fi ght, and it might get you killed if you worry too 
much about the cutting edge versus the thrusting tip and 
the rest of that sort of nonsense.
    “I know swords--that’s all I need.”
    “I knew a fellow who liked to talk fancy, just like you. He’s 
dead now.”
ELUSIVE ATTACK
You know that the key to winning any fi  ght is not getting hit, 
so you trade offensive power for a steadier defense.
 Level: 6th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the fi  ghter bonus feat at 6th level.
 Benefi  t: At 6th level, you master a technique of combining 
offense and defense. As a full-round action, make one attack 
at your highest base attack bonus. Until the start of your next 
pqs
FIGHTER BATTLECRIES
Differentiating between friend and foe is a vital part of any fight. 
In the heat of the battle visual recognition of friend and foe can 
be  difficult;  a  predefined  shouted  cry  or  motto  can  promote  
recognition, as well as unnerve your foes.
pqs
Clear the way!
To arms!
To battle!
To the end!
To me!
Warriors, forward!
All together!
Blades and blood!
[[Home city name]]!
[[mercenary company name]]!
620_95374_Ch2.indd   44620_95374_Ch2.indd   442/8/06   3:11:21 PM2/8/06   3:11:21 PM

45
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
turn, you gain a +2 dodge bonus to AC. This bonus improves 
to +4 at 11th level and to +6 at 16th level.
COUNTERATTACK
Every offensive move creates an opening for a counter-
attack, and you know how to exploit this facet of combat to 
its fullest.
Level: 12th.
Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the fi  ghter bonus feat at 12th level.
Benefi  t: At 12th level, you learn to hold back some of 
your offensive prowess to enable a potent counterattack. As 
a full-round action, make one melee attack at your highest 
base attack bonus. At any time before the start of your next 
turn, you can use an immediate action to make a melee attack 
(using your highest base at tack bonus) against an enemy that 
attacks you in melee.
OVERPOWERING AT TACK
You never waste time wounding your opponent, instead 
concentrating on delivering one solid strike.
  Level: 16th.
Replaces: If you select this class feature, 
you  do  not  gain  the  fighter  bonus  feat  at  
16th level.
  Benefit:  At  16th  level,  you  can  focus  
your attention in combat to deliver a single 
deadly attack. As a full-round action, make 
one attack at your highest base attack bo-
nus.  That  attack  deals  double  damage,  as  
do any other attacks you make before the 
start of your next turn.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Archer
Elf Fighter
Ability Scores: Str 15, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 
10, Wis 12, Cha 8.
          Skills:     Jump, Spot (cc).
          Feats:     Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot.
          Weap o ns : Spear (1d8/×3), dagger (1d4/19–20, 10 ft.) 
longbow with 40 arrows (1d8/×3, 100 ft.).
          Armor:     Chain shirt (+4 AC).
          Other     Gear:     Standard adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
Package 2: The Defender
Dwarf Fighter
    Ability    Scores:    Str  15,  Dex  13,  Con  16,  Int  10,  Wis  12,  
Cha 6.
    Skills:    Craft (weaponsmithing), Intimidate.
     Feats:     Iron Will, Weapon Focus (dwarven waraxe).
     Weap o n:     Dwarven waraxe (1d10/×3), shortbow with 20 
arrows (1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy steel shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
Package 3: The Destroyer
Human Fighter
    Ability    Scores:    Str  15,  Dex  13,  Con  14,  Int  10,  Wis  12,  
Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb, Intimidate, Jump.
     Feats:     Cleave, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (greatsword).
     Weap o ns :     Greatsword (2d6/19–20), shortbow with 20 arrows 
(1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
SCARS
Every scar has a story, and your body tells many tales.
Jagged Scar Running from Eye to Jaw: “A guy at the Rolling Rock 
Alehouse got in a lucky shot with a broken whisky bottle.”
Raking Scars Down Arm and Chest: “Yeah, turns out this girl I 
was seeing was actually a werewolf.”
Huge Halfmoon Scar on Forearm: “Damn shark man got a bite 
out of me.”
Ragged Circle Scar on Stomach: “See this? A salamander stuck 
me with a flaming spear. You haven’t felt pain until you’ve had a 
yard of burning metal shoved into your guts.”
Serrated Scar on Brow: “The lich said ‘run’ and I ran—right into 
its sarcophagus. Knocked me silly, but the pain washed away 
the fear.”
Half-healed  Scar  on  Palm:  “When  I  grabbed  that  demon,  it  
burned my hand with hellish cold fire. The damn thing still hasn’t 
healed! Sometimes, when I wake from a nightmare I can’t remem-
ber, the wound is oozing a strange, green fluid. . . .”
Mystery  Scar:  “It’s  something  I  want  to  forget  and  that  you  
don’t want to know about.”
Tordek Brighthammer, Warchief of the Iron Halls
Illus. by S. Ellis
620_95374_Ch2.indd   45620_95374_Ch2.indd   452/8/06   3:11:28 PM2/8/06   3:11:28 PM

46
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
HEXBLADE
Nothing fazes you. Like the warlock, you are a son of dark-
ness, gi fted w ith powers that others fi  nd unnerving (at best) 
or outright evil (the usual case). Your adventures carry you 
far  and  wide,  because  you  rarely  fi nd it easy to stay in the 
same place for long. Sooner or later the whispers and guarded 
glances begin again, and it is time to move on. No one under-
stands your powers, and most people you meet wonder exactly 
how you’re going to stab them in the back when you fi  nally  
show your true colors. Hexblades have a bad reputation in 
many quarters, but whether you’re the exception or the rule 
is up to you.
     This class appears in 
the Complete Warrior 
supplement.
     Suggested     Backgrounds     
(choose  one):  Artisan, 
Drifter,  Gutter  snipe,  
Soldier.
     Suggested     Personality     
Archetypes (choose one): 
Daredevil, Mercenary, 
Orphan, Rebel, Renegade, 
Wanderer.
CHARACTER 
THEMES
One or more of the following 
character  themes  could  apply  
to you.
Darkhunter: Sometimes   evil   is   
the  best  weapon  to  wield  against  evil.  
You are a grim and dark avenger, using 
your baleful abilities to hunt down 
and slay villains and monsters more 
evil than yourself. Even if your 
methods and motivations are not 
particularly  pure,  who  can  
question your results?
     As a sworn enemy of 
evil,  you  do  not  hesi-
tate before taking on a 
quest to destroy or drive 
off even the most horrible monster. You 
commit to the hunt with little expectation of 
reward. But once you’ve chosen an enemy to 
defeat,  you’ll  stop  at  nothing  to  come  out  on  top.  Bargain  
away your orc captives to the mind fl ayers to gain passage 
through their territory to the place where your true adver-
sar y lairs? No problem. Sanitize an outbrea k of lycanthropy 
by killing all the bitten villagers? It’s hard, but necessary. 
You rarely indulge in cruelty or excess, but you can be a 
remorseless foe indeed.
     You are absolutely convinced that you are the only person 
who really knows what’s go-
ing on in most situations. 
Cut off people who talk 
too  much,  before  they  
waste more of your time. 
Don’t bother to tell peo-
ple  what  you  are  going  to  
do,  and  never  explain  your  
actions   afterward.   Your   com-
panions  don’t  have  the  stomach  
for  the  work  at  hand,  so  it  would  be  
better if they didn’t get in your way or 
question your methods. You can always fi  nd  
new allies.
    Darkhunters are silent, nameless fi gures who 
do not deign to speak to their foes—or their allies, 
for that mat ter. When they do, they tend to be terse, 
grim, and blunt.
       “Enough talk. Now it’s time to die.”
       “Go home, bar your door, and ignore anything you 
hear outside from sundown to sunup. You may live to 
see the dawn.”
       “Do not follow me. I will kill anyone who does.”
          “I’ve     seen     worse.”
   Sellsword: You are a sword for hire—
nothing more, nothing less. You judge the 
worthiness of a cause by the amount 
of money it can put in your pock-
et. While you always look out for 
number one, you do recognize 
the  value  of  loyalty  to  your  
comrades—you  don’t  have  
many fr iends i n this world, 
so it’s smart to stay on 
the good side of the few 
you have.
        Since  your  powers  
are  poorly  understood,  you  go  
to some lengths to hide them from people you 
don’t  know.  Let  them  think  you’re  simply  a  
fighter, or perhaps a fighter-sorcerer. Witch-hunts, sinister 
rumors,  and  ugly  accusations  are  all  bad  for  business.  
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
DOESN’T PLAY WELL WITH OTHERS
Sometimes, the most interesting characters are those with the 
worst attitude problems. They’re just not team players. You can 
seriously annoy the other players at the game table by playing 
this role to the hilt, so be careful when you adopt a persona that 
is hard to get along with. A little bit of attitude goes a very long 
way. Instead of starting a fight when your friends are trying to 
roleplay  a  conversation  with  a  NPC,  you  could  simply  adopt  a  
sullen silence or utter dark, cryptic warnings. Rather than derail a 
well-worked out plan to defeat a particular monster by not doing 
your  part,  negotiate  an  assignment  that  doesn’t  tie  you  to  the  
rest of the party, such as scouting, sneaking up behind the foe, 
or distracting another enemy nearby. In short, you should still 
be a team player, even if your character isn’t.
Athain, keeper of the 
t
hre
efold mystery
Illus. by J. Nelson
620_95374_Ch2.indd   46620_95374_Ch2.indd   462/8/06   3:11:36 PM2/8/06   3:11:36 PM

47
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
Besides, it’s useful to keep a few tricks up your sleeve; you 
never know when a surprise hex might be the only way to 
save your skin.
    You rarely get worked up over the opposition, because to 
you, it’s all business. Ogres rampaging through the province? 
You can fi  x that. Demons murdering the priests of Pelor? 
You’ll adjust your rates and take your best shot at stopping 
them. You need a record for reliability and success if you’re 
going to make any real money.
     Others might view you as cold or heartless, but you know 
that it’s wisest to avoid emotional entanglements. You can’t 
stand it when people start acting against their self-interest in 
the name of a nebulous “cause,” and you detest deal-breakers. 
When dealing with potential employers, look them right in 
the eye and state your terms.
    “What’s in it for me?”
    “I’m not getting paid to do that.”
     “The dragon wasn’t in the contract. If you want the dragon taken 
care of, you’re going to have to up your offer.”
    “Nothing personal. It’s just business.”
    “Sounds like you have a real problem. It’s going to cost you.”
 Tor mented Cha mpion: Dark powers manipulate you. 
People you love get hurt, causes you support founder and 
collapse, and places you visit fall into ruin. You have been 
marked for a tortured and restless existence, and your fate 
is to be a harbinger of doom and woe.
     You swing from morose depression to desperate acts of 
blazing anger. Most of the time, you struggle with despon-
dency  and  gloom.  Make  dark  pronouncements  and  dire  
predictions about things you observe, and point out fl  aws  
in your your allies’ plans.
     Sometimes you are moved to rail against your fate and lash 
out  with  blind,  unreasoning  anger  at  whatever  obstacle  or  
foe frustrates you. You might leap headlong into a throng of 
enemies, heedless of your safety. Or you might shake your 
fi  st at the gods and curse them bitterly.
     “The  vampire’s  been  watching  us  the  whole  time.  We’re  doing  
exactly what he wants.”
    “Some of us aren’t getting out of this alive.”
    “You’ll get halfway across, the rope will break, and you’ll fall 
into the river there and be swept away into some black, airless 
cavern where you’ll die trying to claw your way through cold, 
hard stone.”
    “Is that all you’ve got?”
DARK COMPANION
By mixing arcane spells with martial talents, the hexblade 
blurs  the  traditional  line  between  fighter  and  sorcerer.  
Replacing the familiar—a link to traditional forms of arcane 
magic—with a unique fi ghting companion helps establish 
the hexblade’s difference from the sorcerer.
     In combat, a dark companion functions like a fl oating hex 
that you can place upon your foes. By weakening the defenses 
of enemies, your dark companion makes your spells and 
attacks (and those of your allies) more powerful.
 Level: 4th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
a familiar.
 Benefi  t: At 4th level, you can create an illusory companion 
resembling a panther, spun from the darkness of the night. 
Doing so takes 24 hours and uses up magic materials that cost 
100 gp. Once created, your dark companion stands with you 
in battle, hindering your enemies’ defenses.
    Any enemy adjacent to your dark companion takes a –2 
penalty on its saves and to its AC. Your companion’s speed 
is  equal  to  yours  (including  all  modes  of  movement  you  
possess) and it acts during your turn each round. It follows 
your mental commands perfectly—in effect, it is merely an 
extension of your will.
    Your dark companion has no real substance, and thus 
can’t  attack  or  otherwise  affect  creatures  or  objects.  It  
occupies  a  5-foot  space.  Even  though  any  creature  can  
enter a dark companion’s 5-foot space without restriction, 
it must occupy its own space in order to have any effect 
on enemies. It is immune to any damage or other effects 
that might harm creatures, though it can be dispelled or 
suppressed just like a spell effect. Your dark companion is 
treated as a spell whose level is equal to 1/4 your hexblade 
level. If it is dispel led, it automatical ly refor ms at your side 
24 hours later.
    A dark companion can’t create fl anking situations, nor 
does  it  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity  from  movement,  
because  enemies  automatically  recognize  it  as  an  illusion.  
If it is more than 120 feet from you at the start of your turn, 
or if you ever lose line of effect to it, it instantly reappears 
adjacent to you.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Defender
Gnome Hexblade
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 14.
    Skills:    Bluff, Spellcraft.
     Feat: Armor Profi  ciency  (medium).
     Weap o ns :     Greatsword (1d8/19–20), short bow with 20 arrows 
(1d4/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
Package 2: The Destroyer
Human Hexblade
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 14.
    Skills:    Concentration, Intimidate, Spellcraft.
     Feat: Power Attack, Cleave.
     Weap o ns :     Greataxe (1d12/×3), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 10 gp.
Package 3: The Skirmisher
Elf Hexblade
     Ability     Scores:     Str 15, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 14.
    Skills:    Diplomacy, Knowledge (arcana). 
     Feat:     Dodge.
     Weap o ns :     Glaive (1d10/×3), warhammer (1d8/×3), longbow 
with 20 arrows (1d8/×3, 100 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 14 gp.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   47620_95374_Ch2.indd   472/8/06   3:11:46 PM2/8/06   3:11:46 PM

48
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
MARSHAL
War is your true calling. You follow the shrill ring of steel 
on steel and the harsh cries of the carrion birds, for it is on 
the battlefi  eld that you demonstrate your true worth. When 
the specter of war is far away, you take service with a strong 
lord, state, or cause, training other warriors and preparing 
your warband for the day when battle fi nally comes to the 
land in which you reside. Or, if that does not suit you, you 
search out combat wherever it awaits—perhaps you skirmish 
against orc raiders threatening the kingdom’s frontier, fi  ght  
for  a  rebellious  duke  who  is  trying  to  throw  off  the  king’s  
rule in his lands, or travel abroad to far and exotic lands in 
search of a battle worthy of your talents. When you take up 
the haphazard career of an adventurer, you’re only passing 
the time until something big comes along.
     This class appears in the Miniatures Handbook supplement.
     Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Artisan, Mariner, Noble 
Scion, Soldier.
    Suggested  Personality  Archetypes  (choose  one):  Challenger, 
Crusader, Leader, Mercenary, Royalty, Strategist, Theorist.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or both of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
    Black    Knight:    You are a hero of the first rank, a bold 
and inspiring leader of men—but you do not want to be 
recognized. Knights entering the lists sometimes cover their 
heraldic devices with sable cloths to keep their identities a 
secret; you likewise do not display the emblems you have 
won, and adopt a simple nom de guerre so that no one will 
know who you are.
     Decide why you desire anonymity. You could be a noble of 
high birth, expected to spend your days engaged in statecraft 
instead of roaming the land as a nameless adventurer. You 
adopt your guise so that you will be free to aid people with 
the point of your sword instead of wasting time with the 
intrigues of the court. You might have a fearsome enemy 
that you cannot defeat, and so you remain hidden so that 
the people around you will not become the victims of your 
adversary. Or perhaps you are actually infamous, known for 
a terrible defeat on a distant battlefi  eld. You carry the guilt 
of hundreds of lost lives, even though you might not have 
ever had any chance to triumph.
     If your DM agrees, you are a member of the nobility. Design 
your house’s heraldic insignia and motto, so that you can 
descr ibe what you reveal when you fi  nally choose to unmask 
your shield.
    Since you are trying to remain mostly anonymous, you 
don’t v iew it as your role to be the bold and inspir ing leader of 
your party. Instead, you are satisfi  ed to be a stalwar t comrade 
and loyal follower, using your abilities to help your friends 
defeat their foes. You do your best to avoid the spotlight and 
give credit to your allies for your successes.
     “I may have struck the last blow, but the troll was dead on its feet 
by then. Mialee’s fi reball made all the difference.”
    “Valor is its own reward.”
    “I was there, certainly, and I suppose I played a small part. But 
my companions deserve the credit for defeating the dragon.”
    “Give my share to the temple of St. Cuthbert.”
    “Who I am is not important. What is important is that the 
werewolf has been slain. Your town should be safe now.”
 Leader of the Company: A marshal combines personal 
char isma, leadership, and tactical acumen l i ke no other char-
acter. You are a born leader, the equal of a paladin. Everyone 
expects  fl owery speech from the bard or persuasive words 
from the sorcerer, but the marshal and the paladin are heroes 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
TAKING CHARGE AT THE TABLE
If your character is the “leader” of the adventuring party, you’ve 
got a hard but rewarding bit of roleplaying ahead of you. Most 
people at the gaming table don’t want to be bossed around; 
we all get enough of that in our real lives, after all. Even if you 
think your character would be a hard-nosed drill sergeant who 
barks orders at everyone around him, you’d better not try that 
at the table.
    So how do you lead in the game without stepping on every-
one else’s ability to make choices? You need to be a democratic 
leader, not an autocratic one. To that end, try these techniques.
 Ask for ideas: Solicit suggestions from the other players, even 
if  it’s  something  as  simple  as  “Anybody  got  half  an  idea  of  
what this monster can do?” Recognize other characters’ areas 
of  expertise  and  ask  for  their  help.  For  example,  if  the  party  
is facing a magical phenomenon, make a point of asking the 
player running the arcane spellcaster what he thinks the party 
should do.
 Be the chooser of plans: Make a point of trying other players’ 
suggestions instead of issuing your orders without their input. 
Don’t go with the same player’s idea each and every time—
everybody at the table should have an opportunity to see their 
ideas tested by the party. It’s okay to choose your own plan, but 
make that the exception, not the rule.
 Encourage initiative: Look for ways to put decision-making in 
the hands of your comrades. For example, if you want the rogue 
to scout ahead, don’t provide exacting instructions for how far 
ahead you’d like her to be or what she should do if she gets 
in trouble. If the party needs information about the location 
of a villain’s lair, look over to the bard and say, “Devis, you’re 
in charge of finding out where Talthon is hiding. We’ll follow 
your lead.”
 Be generous with praise: Cheer the successes of other players 
in character. Your leader should shout out a “Well done!” or 
“Huzzah!” or “By the gods, you fight like a lion today!” when 
other characters do well.
 Avoid criticizing others: Here’s a place where game leader-
ship takes a sharp turn from real-world leadership. In real life, 
a leader needs to let his or her subordinates know if they’re 
falling short of the mark—preferably without humiliating them 
in public, but that depends on the setting. It’s not your job to 
make the other people at the table better D&D players or more 
thoughtful followers, and they’ll resent it if you try. As a “leader” 
in the game, you have to be exceedingly careful about criticizing 
other players. Nobody wants to come to a game to be chewed 
out or cut down by a sarcastic remark. An absence of praise 
speaks volumes, if you’ve been generous with your encourage-
ment previously.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   48620_95374_Ch2.indd   482/8/06   3:11:52 PM2/8/06   3:11:52 PM

49
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
that warriors want to follow. You possess sincerity, purpose, 
and valor, and your potent auras allow you to manifest these 
virtues for your allies.
     Not  only  are  you  a  skilled  diplomat,  but  you  are  the  
absolute best choice for the job of battle commander. Since 
you can easily change the benefit your aura provides, it 
behooves your allies to follow your lead. They’ll do better 
in the fi  ght if they take actions that make use of your aura. 
For example, if you choose the minor auras over the top or 
master of opportunity, you provide a real incentive for your 
friends to charge or move past enemies to reach the foe you 
want them to fi  ght. When you use your auras this way, say 
something inspirational!
    You should strongly consider the Leadership feat if you 
are roleplaying a marshal of this type. If the other play-
ers at the table don’t listen to you, at least your cohort or 
followers will.
“Ignore the lizardfolk! The druid is our true foe!”
     “Surround the gray render and strike from the fl  ank! That is the 
quickest path to victory!”
    “Stand your ground here, and let the orcs come to us! We’ll cut 
them down as they climb the rampart!”
    “Follow me! Now is the time to strike!”
ADRENALINE BOOST
As a marshal, you ma ke ever yone on your team more ef fective 
at what they do. While the traditional marshal accomplishes 
some of that by improving his allies’ mobility, by choosing 
adrenaline boost you instead to take on some of the cleric’s 
ability  to  bolster  the  health  of  your  allies.  It’s  particularly  
effective  in  rallying  injured  comrades,  making  it  a  good  
ability to save until things start looking grim.
 Level: 4th.
Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the grant move action class feature.
Benefi  t: Starting at 4th level, you can exhort your allies 
to discover a reservoir of energy they didn’t think they had. 
Once per day, as a standard action, you can grant temporary 
hit  points  equal  to  your  marshal  level  to  any  or  all  of  your  
al l ies w ithin 30 feet ( but not to yoursel f ). If the al ly ’s cur rent 
hit point total is no more than half his full normal hit points, 
the number of temporary hit points granted to that character 
is doubled (to twice your marshal level).
    This ability only affects allies with an Intelligence score of 3 
or higher who can hear you and understand your language. The 
temporary hit points last for up to 1 minute per marshal level.
     At 8th level, you can use this ability twice per day. You can 
use it three times per day at 12th level, four times per day at 
16th level, and fi  ve times per day at 20th level.
    If you use this ability on a creature that is still under the 
effect of a previous use, the new temporary hit points overlap 
(do  not  stack  with)  the  temporary  hit  points  the  creature  
had remaining.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Defender
Dwarf Marshal
     Ability     Scores:     Str 14, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Intimidate, Listen, Spot.
     Feat: Shield Specialization (heavy).
     Weap o ns :     Dwarven waraxe (1d10/×3), warhammer (1d8/×3), 
5 javelins (1d6, 30 ft.)
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 6 gp.
    Aura: Force of Will.
Package 2: The Second-Rank Warrior
Elf Marshal
     Ability     Scores:     Str 14, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Diplomacy, Listen, Sense Motive, Spot.
     Feat: Combat Refl  exes.
     Weap o ns :     Glaive  (1d10/×3),  shortbow  with  20  arrows  
(1d8/×3, 100 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 26 gp.
    Aura: Master of Tactics.
Package 3: The Vanguard
Human Marshal
     Ability     Scores:     Str 14, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 8, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Diplomacy,  Intimidate,  Knowledge  (nobility  and  
royalty), Sense Motive, Spot.
    Feats:    Battlefield  Inspiration  (Miniatures   Handbook), 
Improved Initiative.
     Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d8/19–20), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy steel shield (+2 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 20 gp.
    Aura: Motivate Dexterity.
Korrin, Protector of the Crown
Illus. by H. Lyon
620_95374_Ch2.indd   49620_95374_Ch2.indd   492/8/06   3:11:59 PM2/8/06   3:11:59 PM

50
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
MONK
You were introduced to martial techniques in a distant, 
hard-to-reach monastery. You fi  rst learned the eighteen basic 
empty-hand  techniques.  You  learned  the  “heart-mind-fi  st”  
kata, you learned how to swing an eyebrow-height staff, 
and you finally learned how to deliver 
the potent cannon punch.
    After that, you were ready to 
begin actual training in the 
truly deadly martial arts.
     Years later you emerged, 
a   champion   of   your   
martial  style,  but  still  
a  student  seeking  con-
tinual  improvement  and  
perfection  through  mar-
tial  discipline.  One  day  
you hope to join the 
great  masters  of  your  
art, focusing your ki so 
precisely that you tran-
scend the mortal realm 
altogether and partake 
of immortality.
    Suggested    Backgrounds    
(choose  one):  Artisan, 
Ascetic, Gladiator.
     Suggested     Personality     Ar     che     types     
(choose  one):  Agent,  Challenger,  
Companion, Crusader, Innocent, Martyr, Orphan, 
Prophet, Seeker, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
Enlightened One: You follow a meditative way of life con-
sidered by some a religion, by others a profound philosophy, 
and by the uninformed simply a routine. You regard your 
constant search for enlightenment as a way of life, work, and 
an art form.
     One of the precepts of your philosophy is “sitting meditation” 
in which you sit quietly once a day, directing your awareness 
toward your core and breathing deeply for at least 5 minutes.
    As an “enlightened one,” you know many parables, called 
koans, that teach wisdom if considered long enough.
 “An enlightened one lived a simple life in a hut at the foot of a 
mountain. One evening a thief visited the hut only to discover there 
was nothing to steal. The enlightened one caught him and told the 
rogue, ‘You’ve traveled far to fi  nd me, so you should not leave empty-
handed. Here, have my robe as a gift.’ Confused, the thief nevertheless 
took the robe. Nude, his eyes on the full moon, the enlightened one 
said, ‘I wish I could have given him this beautiful moon.’ ”
“An enlightened one visited a terminally ill man and asked, “Shall I 
lead you on? ’ The sick man replied, ‘I came here alone and I go alone. 
What help could you be? ’ The enlightened one answered, ‘If you think 
you really come and go, that is your delusion. Let me show you the path 
on which there is no coming and no going.’ These words revealed the 
true path so clearly that the sick man smiled and passed on.”
 History Keeper: Every monastery has its own story of 
origin, describing where it gained its particular style and 
what ancient master popularized the particular specialized 
form of martial arts taught there. Every monastery puts in 
a claim as the oldest, or alleges to teach the 
most “pure” form of the martial arts.
       You don’t fret about it because you 
know your monastery is actually the 
oldest  and  the  most  authentic.  You  
like  to  tell  the  story  of  how  your  
monastery learned the secrets of its 
current style.
        “The  ancient  and  legendary  
master  Chandharma  founded  
our temple fi ve hundred years 
ago, and the monks took him in. 
In thanks, Chandharma trained 
the monks in the original, true 
forms and katas. I know the very 
style that ancient Chandharma 
once taught my forebears.”
          “Northern”     Stylist:
Your  monastery  taught  a  
particular style of martial 
arts referred to as the north-
ern style. This style features long 
steps,  extended  postures  and  
wide stances, jumping, kicking, 
and dramatic acrobatic fl  ourishes.  
The northern style is known for a 
great variety of attack forms. When 
you use any one of these forms, you 
call out the attack name in a strong, con-
fi  dent voice, which steadies you and frightens your enemies 
with your poise.
“Long  Fist! ”  You  use  this  punch  attack  to  spear  past  your  
foe’s guard when least expected.
 “Tumbling  Fis t ! ” A tumbling fi  st is the strike you make after 
you’ve tumbled into the perfect position to strike at your foe.
 “Quivering Palm!” This famous strike needs no explanation. 
Even if you’re not powerful enough to use the discipline, the 
name alone inspires fear in your enemies.
 “Red Fist!” Whenever  you  draw  fi  rst  blood,  you  like  to  
scream this out, just to unnerve your foe.
     “Flood     Fist! ” When you use a fl  urry of blows, you are using 
the famous fl  ood  fi  st, where you seek to overwhelm your foe’s 
defenses under a fl  ood of staggering blows.
“Flower Fist! ” This disingenuous, fast and deceptive blow is 
made whenever you foe is off guard, whether he is surprised, 
fl  anked, or otherwise not effectively defending himself.
     “Southeastern”     Stylist: Your monastery taught a particular 
style of martial art referred to as the southeastern style. This 
style features fi  sts, elbows, shins, feet, and knees to strike at 
opponents, as well as briefl  y held grapples that set an opponent 
up for a particularly egregious elbow or knee attack. Unlike other 
martial styles, the southeastern style is specifi  cally designed to 
incorporate fi  tness and toughness, which allows a southeastern 
style fi ghter the endurance to accept pain and ignore fatigue 
Ember, Mistress of the 
Four Winds
Illus. by C. Frank
620_95374_Ch2.indd   50620_95374_Ch2.indd   502/8/06   3:12:08 PM2/8/06   3:12:08 PM

51
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
in a fi  ght. When you use a southeastern style attack form, you 
call out the attack name in a strong, confi dent voice, which 
steadies you and frightens your enemies with your poise.
 “Kao Dode! ” As part of an attack, you jump and bring your 
knee up into your opponent ’s stomach, side, or i f low enough, 
your opponent’s head.
 “Kao Loi! ” You spring up off one leg and switch in midair 
to strike with the knee of the other leg. This confusing strike 
is dramatic when successful.
 “Kao Tone! ” The simplest knee strike, you simply bring one 
knee up directly into your foe’s stomach, side, or head (i f low 
enough). Sometimes this is aided if you grab your foe by the 
head and jerk him forward at the same time.
    “Southern”    Stylist:    Your monastery taught a particular 
style of martial art referred to as the southern style. This style 
features short steps and close fi  ghting, with arms close to the 
chest, elbows held low and ready to offer protection against 
blows to the stomach or sides. Most important, the southern 
style is distinguished by fi  ve  animals.
    When you use any one of these styles, you call out the 
animal you are emulating in a strong, confi  dent voice, which 
steadies you and frightens your enemies with your poise.
 “Tiger! ” You emulate the tiger to express qualities of fearless-
ness and aggression. The tiger attacks in a straight line. When 
you charge, you are emulating the tiger, the most aggressive 
of the fi  ve “southern” animals.
 “Crane!” You emulate the crane to avoid your enemies’ attacks, 
no mat ter how they come at you. When fi ghting defensively, 
you are emulating the crane.
 “Leopard!” You emulate the leopard to maximize your agility. 
After all, pound for pound the leopard is one of the strongest 
animals, and also the fastest. When you tumble into position 
to attack your opponents, you are emulating the leopard.
 “Snake!”  You  adopt  the  fl uidity of snakes to better close 
with your opponents and hurt them from positions they are 
unready to defend against. When you grapple an opponent, 
you imitate the sinuous, fl  uid motion of the snake.
 “Dragon!” You emulate the dragon for a broad array of needs. 
When you attack under the guise of the dragon, your attacks 
are strong and hard. When you make a stunning attack, you 
are emulating the dragon.
     A signature attack is the three-fi  nger claw (“Dragon Claw!”)—
the  index,  thumb  and  middle  fi  ngers  make  hard  pinching  
attacks to your foe’s muscles and tendons. When striking with 
the dragon claw, you have incredible stunning power because 
the blow originates in your stomach and hips, then fl  ows  up  
as you rotate forward into the blow, which culminates in the 
stunning claw.
 Staffmaster: While you are adept at closed and open 
hand styles of martial arts, you are particularly skilled with 
the use of a long quarterstaff. Instead of the standard length 
quarterstaff, you prefer a 7- to 8-foot-long, fl exible staff that 
you refer to as your “fl  owing water staff” or sometimes your 
“d r a go n   p ol e .”
     Instead of attacking with either end, you usually grasp one 
end of the staff and use it to make devastating thrust attacks, 
diversionary “slap” attacks, and to defl ect the blows of your 
foes, letting them slide off your staff like water.
DECISIVE STRIKE
Flurry of blows can be exciting to use—just look at all the 
attack  rolls  you  can  make—but  in  practice  it  can  lead  to  a  
fl  urry of misses. The decisive strike alternative class feature 
turns your typical combat maneuver from a whirl of action 
into a methodical and devastating attack.
 Level: 1st.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not 
gain f lurry of blows (or any later improvements to that 
class feature).
 Benefit: As a full-round action, make one attack with 
an unarmed strike or a special monk weapon, using your 
highest base attack bonus but taking a –2 penalty on this 
attack roll. If the attack hits, it deals double damage (as does 
any  other  attack  you  make  before  the  start  of  your  next  
turn). If you use this strike to deliver a stunning attack, 
increase the save DC to resist the stun by 2. This is an 
extraordinary ability.
     At  5th  level,  the  penalty  on  the  attack  roll  lessens  to  –1,  
and at 9th level it disappears.
     At 11th level, you can make two attacks when using this class 
feature, though no more than one attack can target a single 
creature. Both attacks use your highest base attack bonus.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Defender
Human Monk
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Balance, Listen, Sense Motive, Spot, Tumble.
     Feats:     Combat Focus*, Dodge, Stunning Fist.
     Weap o n: Unarmed strike (1d6), sling with 10 bullets (1d4, 
50 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
    Other    Gear:    Standard advent urer ’s kit (w ithout sunrods), 
1 gp, 3 sp.
Package 2: The Destroyer
Half-Orc Monk
    Ability    Scores:    Str 15, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 14, Cha 6.
    Skills:    Climb, Jump, Tumble.
     Feat:     Improved Grapple, Improved Natural Attack, Weapon 
Focus (unarmed strike).
     Weap o n: Unarmed strike (1d8), sling with 10 bullets (1d4, 
50 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
    Other    Gear:    Standard advent urer ’s kit (w ithout sunrods), 
1 gp, 3 sp.
Package 3: The Skirmisher
Elf Monk
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Hide, Listen, Move Silently, Tumble.
     Feat:     Ability Focus (stunning fi  st), Stunning Fist.
     Weap o n: Unarmed strike (1d6), sling with 10 bullets (1d4, 
50 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
    Other    Gear:    Standard advent urer ’s kit (w ithout sunrods), 
1 gp, 3 sp.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   51620_95374_Ch2.indd   512/8/06   3:12:17 PM2/8/06   3:12:17 PM

52
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
PA L ADIN
You have power over evil, given you by your glorious, almighty 
deity. Your devotion and pure, unwavering desire provides 
strength that illuminates the darkest souls, saving some and 
punishing those that can’t be redeemed. Your faith wards you 
from harm, inoculates you from fear, and gives you the hands 
of a healer—but your hands are equally dynamic on the hilt 
of an avenging sword pledged to divinity.
     When wizards scheme, you pray. When dragons roar, you 
ta ke up your sword, fearless. When dev i ls from the 
Hells steal innocent souls, you respond with 
sacred vengeance and send them f leeing 
back to the pit whence they came.
    Suggested  Backgrounds  (choose  one):  
Ascetic, Noble Scion, Soldier.
    Suggested    Personality    Archetypes    
(choose  one):  Agent,  Compan-
ion,  Crusader,  Leader,  Martyr,  
Prophet, Royalty, Strategist.
CHARACTER 
THEMES
One  or  more  of  the  follow-
ing character themes could 
apply to you.
Bound  in  Honor:  You  
fol low a str ict code of honor. 
Whenever a situation arises 
that might touch upon your 
code, you voice the particu-
lar precept of your code, as 
if part of a prayer to your 
deity.  In  doing  so,  you  
hope that others will be 
inspired  by  your  good  
example,  and  perhaps  be-
gin to follow parts of the 
code themselves.
     You r code i ncludes t wo 
or more of the follow-
ing  principles.  You  might  
enunciate additional principles 
not  described  here,  depending  
on the deity or cause you serve.
“Before  all  else,  a  paladin  is  faithful.”  The 
faith of a paladin requires no proof—it is a 
heartfelt knowledge that the goodness you do, or the evil 
you allow to fl ourish, is all that you take from this world 
to the next.
 “A paladin’s valor is a measure of her faith.”When things begin 
to go bad, your valor proves itself. When knocked low, you 
get up. You do not run from conf lict if it can be won, and 
most especially, you never leave compatriots to a fi  ght  that  is  
yours to win. Fear is something that only less valorous men 
and women experience.
“Humility in all things.”You are modest regarding your own 
importance and always submit to your deity’s will. You know 
your place, but your place is important. You are not proud 
or arrogant, though you challenge the unenlightened with 
your creed.
 “Patience outlasts all.” You understand that it might take your 
entire l i fe span to ma ke a di f ference in the world—you don’t 
hurry, you persevere. You have the god-supported tenacity 
not to quit your tasks, once taken up.
 “Loyalty to true friends, vengeance to betrayers and foes.” You 
know that strength fl  ows from solidarity, and solidarity only 
comes  when  all  trust  each  other.  Defeating  the  evils  that  
plague the world is possible if all are loyal. Those who betray 
loyalty must be dealt with swiftly.
“Benevolence  is  a  balm  to  all  souls.”
A paladin is charitable and desires to 
safeguard  others  from  infl  uences  that  
would destroy their innocence or end 
their lives. Benevolence is no less a tool 
of your deity than your sword.
“Integrity is the foundation on which all 
things of value are built.” You adhere to the 
ethical and moral standards of your deity, 
acting in all ways as a beacon of truth-
fulness that others might emulate. Your 
character and sense of self relies upon 
your honesty. How can one be truth-
ful “to a fault”?
“Mercy  for  those  that  deserve  
mercy.” Sometimes even the righ-
teous can stray from the true path, 
and  thus  you  must  occasionally  
show   compassion.   However,   
mercy  for  unrepentant  evil-
doers is tantamount to doing 
evil yourself.
“Generosity  is  the  left  
hand of [your deity].” When 
you  are  willing  to  give  of  
your  wealth,  or  even  more  
important,   your   time,   you   
show  the  real  strength  and  
depth  of  your  belief  in  your  
deity. Only someone truly com-
fortable  with  her  faith  has  the  
spiritual reserve to be generous.
Chivalrous: You  seek  to  be  a  paragon  of  
the  concepts  of  justice  and  morality  in  behav-
ior between people. As such, you are brave in 
battle, loyal to your deity, and willing to sacrifi  ce yourself for 
that belief (see Bound in Honor, above). Toward your fellows 
you are merciful, humble, and courteous.
     Most  important,  you  are  gracious  and  gentle  to  those  
worthy of high regard, and you might even seek to court 
someone  you  admire.  If  that  person  is  unavailable  and  
married to someone else, especially if he or she is of higher 
status, your chivalry leads you into a type of “courtly love.” 
You dedicate your life to the object of your affection, 
expressing your appreciation from afar through an intricate 
system of colors and r ibbons wor n on behal f of your beloved 
and favors done in his or her name. It’s an elaborate dance, 
Alhandra, Commander 
of the Shining Crusade
Illus. by D. Hudnut
620_95374_Ch2.indd   52620_95374_Ch2.indd   522/8/06   3:12:24 PM2/8/06   3:12:24 PM

53
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
a game that the players freely enjoy without expectation 
of commitment.
    “For the Lady who has my heart, I dedicate this quest.”
     “Leave this to me--honor commands that the fi nal blow be mine.”
 Merciless: Do any deserve mercy? No.
     Leniency and compassion are words used to describe weak 
deal ings toward those who have been judged and found want-
ing. This doesn’t mean that you seek to kill all those who, in 
your judgment, are weak and faithless, but it does mean that 
such creatures do not deserve your respect.
 “There is no mercy, there is only judgment.”
     Moral     Philosopher: Moral conduct, morality, and the cor-
rectness of moral thought are paramount to you; however, you 
know that morals vary by culture. Is one moral code better 
than another? Is an ethical code better, or as your brothers 
and sisters in your order claim, are ethics a mortal-contrived 
sham that hides the true reach of morals? You don’t know, 
but you wonder.
     “An  ethical  code  establishes  tradeoffs  toward  the  greater  good,  
and weighs all the negative and positive results of an action, apart 
from moral absolutes. Thus, decisions are based upon the greatest 
good for the greatest number.”
 Reverent: You begin almost every utterance with a refer-
ence to your god.
 “As the truth of [your deity] tells us . . .”
    “If [your deity] allows . . ..”
    “In the name of [your deity], the benefi cent, the merciful . . .”
 If you do not begin an utterance with a reference to your 
deity, you wrap up with one.
    “. . . as [your deity] commands.”
    “. . . may [your deity] light and guard me.”
     “. . . that all may know the wisdom and majesty of [your deity].”
 Zealous: You are a fervent servant of your deity. You are dili-
gent in your duties, show enthusiasm in performing them on 
your deity’s behalf, and display a powerful interest in anything 
related to your deity, whether it’s support or opposition.
     You show your zeal to your friends and foes in one or more 
of the following ways.
 Exultant: You are joyful and proud when you think of your 
deity, and are given to rejoicing and triumphal shouts. See 
the Paladin Battlecries sidebar.
 Disciple: You know the history of your deity, and those saints 
and other people important to your deity. You know the trials 
and tribulations of your deity and/or your deity’s saints, and 
you reenact those trials in a yearly ceremony. Moreover, you 
dress according to a strict interpretation of any doctrine your 
deity dispenses.
 Missionary: You know with your gut that others would be 
happier if they worshiped your deity as you do. To this end 
you consistently (though not constantly—annoyance isn’t a 
tool of conversion) exhort friends and strangers to convert.
 Tat tooed: You’ve shaved your head and proudly display 
a tattoo of your deity’s holy symbol across your brow and 
naked head.
 Tra c t  G ive r : You always carry with you several tracts that 
describe the glories of your deity, and pass these out (or leave 
them  to  be  found)  wherever  you  think  they’ll  do  the  most  
good. (To this end, you have an arrangement with a printer, or 
at least a letterist.) You are not a vocal missionary, preferring 
to work in more subtle ways.
    “Consider the benefits that would be yours if you find grace 
with [your deity]—surety, confidence, and comradeship, at the 
very least!
CHARGING SMITE
Despite the glorious vision of a shining knight atop a war-
horse charging into combat, the reality in the D&D game is 
that it’s far from easy (and sometimes impossible) to bring 
a big animal along on your dungeon crawl. To avoid the 
drain on time and resources created by a special mount you 
might not even be able to use, you can select the charging 
smite alternative class feature instead. You still leap into 
the fray, taking the fi ght to the enemy, but you do so in a 
manner that better matches the typical combat found in 
a D&D game.
 Level: 5th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
a special mount.
 Benefit: Beginning at 5th level, if you smite evil on a 
charge  attack,  you  deal  an  extra  2  points  of  damage  per  
paladin level to any evil creature you hit (in addition to the 
normal bonus damage dealt by a smite). If the charge attack 
misses, the smite ability is not considered used. This is a 
supernatural ability.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Cavalier
Elf Paladin
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 12, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 12, Cha 15.
    Skill:    Ride.
     Feat:     Mounted Combat.
     Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d8/19–20), lance (1d8/×3), shortbow 
with 20 arrows (1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield.
     Other     Gear:     Standard advent urer ’s kit, wooden holy sy mbol, 
21 gp.
Package 2: The Destroyer
Dwarf Paladin
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 8, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Knowledge (nobility and royalty), Sense Motive.
     Feat:     Power Attack.
     Weap o ns :     Greataxe (1d12/×3), fi  ve javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Standard advent urer ’s kit, wooden holy sy mbol, 
34 gp.
Package 3: The Vanguard
Human Paladin
     Ability     Scores:     Str 12, Dex 8, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Diplomacy, Heal, Sense Motive.
     Feats:     Improved Initiative, Shield Specialization (heavy).
     Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d8/19–20), two javelins (1d6, 30 ft.)
     Armor:     Chain shirt (+4 AC), heavy wooden shield (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Standard advent urer ’s kit, wooden holy sy mbol, 
10 g p.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   53620_95374_Ch2.indd   532/8/06   3:12:34 PM2/8/06   3:12:34 PM

54
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
RANGER
You travel to places where few others dare to tread. Rely ing on 
a potent combination of stealth, woodcraft, magic, and fi  ght-
ing skill, you are the master of the wilderness. Where others 
see a trackless forest, you see an impenetrable refuge. Where 
others see a burning desert, you see a deadly trap for enemies 
you lure within. Where others see impassable mountains, you 
see high roads to new lands. You are the ultimate explorer, 
self-reliant and adaptable. No other adventurer comes close 
to your independence and sheer versatility.
     Suggested  Backgrounds  (choose  one):  Drifter,  Farm  Hand,  
Mariner, Soldier, Tribal Origin.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Explorer, 
Orphan, Rebel, Renegade, Savage, Seeker, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Bounty Hunter: Unlike other rangers, you are equally at 
ease in the wilderness or in the cities and towns of human-
kind. You hone your woodcraft and tracking skills to use them 
against other people instead of forest-dwelling monsters. You 
might be a cold-hearted mercenary, an intrepid tracker, or even 
an outlaw or highwayman who uses woodcraft to get close to 
your quarry. For you, the lore of the wilderness is a tool that 
you employ for your particular ends.
    Your choice of favored enemy makes you more effective at 
tracking (and defeating) particular quarries, so choose wisely. 
It’s not unusual for a bounty hunter to choose his own race as a 
favored enemy—not because you’re a misanthropic killer, but 
simply because you want to be especially good at following vil-
lains who happen to be of your race through the wilderness.
    Keep a record of each quarry you stalk over the course of 
your career, and preferably a trophy or souvenir from each 
success. Show off your trophies and boast a little about your 
victories when you have the chance. You want word to get 
around about who you are and what you do, so that villains 
who fi  nd you on their trail will be more likely to panic, slip 
up, and make a fatal mistake.
    “The price is 100 gold—no less, no more.”
     “Only one bounty has ever escaped me—so far. I keep a constant 
eye out, just in case.”
 Driven Avenger: When you were a child, your town was 
burned to the ground by orcs, or displacer beasts devoured 
your family, or a dragon hunted your tribe to extinction. 
Whatever the tragedy, you have been left with an endless 
thirst for vengeance against the monster or monsters that 
ruined your life.
     The monsters responsible for your loss are at the top of your 
list of favored enemies. Your back-story prominently features 
a tragic loss at the hands, claws, talons, or fangs of these mon-
sters. Create a suitable tale of woe and suffering, and write it 
down—you’ll tell it over and over again to anyone who asks.
     In any situation or challenge you confront, look for signs 
that your mortal enemies are somehow involved. For example, 
if drow enslaved your village, you should suspect drow involve-
ment in almost any problem you encounter.
    “The drow are behind this. You’ll see.”
    “Only drow attack with such precision.”
     “I didn’t like the way that innkeeper was watching us. I bet he’s 
secretly in league with the drow, spying on us for them!”
    “The only good drow is a dead drow.”
 Master of Beasts: You have allies everywhere you go. The 
birds and beasts are your friends, and even the fi  ercest  crea-
tures suffer your presence. While your animal companions 
do not help you in battle like the druid’s help her, you value 
them for more than their fi  ghting skill. Animals give you 
senses  that  you  otherwise  would  not  possess,  allow  you  to  
keep watch over vast areas without being seen, and can carry 
messages over great distances.
     Avoid fighting naturally occurring animals if possible. 
Instead of killing a cave-dwelling brown bear in your path, 
see if you can lure it away from its lair or merely frighten it 
off. Sometimes you have to resort to lethal methods to fi  ght  
off dangerous animals, but there is no honor in such a battle; 
you should help your companions to avoid encounters of this 
sort instead of killing animals that are only acting as their 
nature dictates.
    It’s not unusual for a ranger of this sort to be uncomfort-
able around other people. Keep your thoughts to yourself, 
and don’t use two words when one will do. People are cruel 
and deceitful, but you can always trust an animal to act in 
accordance with its nature. When you have to interact with 
humanoids, stay short and to the point, and speak bluntly. 
When you can, use animal metaphors to make your point.
 “If you hope to catch Drethaas, you must run like the deer all day 
and through the night. Can you keep up with me?”
    “The ogre is licking its wounds in its den. Now we can finish 
the monster.”
    “We have his scent now. He won’t get away.”
     “I have the eyes of an eagle. No orc will pass by this place unseen.”
     Wa y fi  nder:  You live for the opportunity to tread new lands 
and see things no one has seen before. You measure yourself 
against the raw power of nature by crossing unfordable rivers, 
climbing impassable mountains, and mastering uncrossable 
deserts. The lure of treasure and the challenge of fearsome 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
DO ONE JOB, AND DO IT WELL
While rangers have a lot of skill points to spend, you will find that 
it’s just not possible to maximize your skill ranks in all the things 
that rangers do. Depending on your particular character theme, 
you might need to prioritize your skill purchases as follows.
 Bounty Hunter: Craft (trapmaking), Ride, Search, Survival, 
Use Rope. Survival is the most important of these for a tracker. 
Cross-class  skills  such  as  Gather  Information  and  Intimidate  
can be useful, too.
 Driven Avenger: Hide, Listen, Move Silently, Spot.
 Master of Beasts: Handle Animal, Knowledge (nature), Ride.
 Wayfinder: Climb, Knowledge (geography), Survival, Swim, 
Use Rope.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   54620_95374_Ch2.indd   542/8/06   3:12:41 PM2/8/06   3:12:41 PM

55
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
foes serve only as excuses for you to head out on your next 
journey. Before you die, you want to see more of the world 
than anyone before you has seen.
     You are restless and uneasy in times of idleness. You chafe 
at long delays, because when you’re waiting for something 
to happen you’re stuck in one spot. Urge your companions 
to push on another mile, venture into just one more room, 
or at least give you a chance to scout just over the next 
hill before stopping for the night. Keep a journal of your 
travels, noting the weather, the creatures you encountered, 
the places you visited, and the spot where you camped for 
each night.
    Overland travel is your special area of exper-
tise, so make sure you voice your opinion when 
the party debates the question of how to 
move  from  one  place  to  another.  If  
your friends are wise, they’ll lis-
ten to you.
     Because  you  are  widely  
traveled and interested in 
a  variety  of  things,  you  
naturally relate new ex-
periences to things you’ve 
seen or done before.
     “This cave’s a little bit like 
that  second  chamber  in  
the Caverns of Creeping 
Shadows.  You  remem-
ber,  the  one  with  the  
weird green-glowing 
fungus-balls  and  the  
gricks? Do you think 
we  might  fi  nd  gricks  
here too?”
     “Let’s fi  nd a safer place 
to cross. In my experience, 
this is jus t the sor t of moun-
tain stream that will 
batter you to pieces and 
carry  you  over  a  water-
fall if you fall in. I don’t want to have to go looking 
for your body.”
“This desert’s got nothing on the Anvil of Searing Pain. Now that 
was a desert.”
     “Careful!  I’ll  bet  you  these  orcs  are  headhunters,  like  those  
Blood Moon warriors we ran into a few months back. Look, they’ve 
got kukris just like those Blood Moon orcs.”
DISTR ACTING AT TACK
A  ranger’s  animal  companion  isn’t  nearly  as  tough  as  a  
druid’s, and thus works best as a scout or occasional fl anker 
in combat. If your ranger would prefer to avoid the hassle 
of taking care of an animal companion, you can get some 
of the same benefi t with the distracting attack alternative 
class feat ure. Though not as ef fective as an act ual fl  anker,  the  
ability to spread out your attacks to affect multiple enemies 
is a nice side effect.
Level: 4th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
an animal companion.
 Benefit: Beginning at 4th level, whenever you hit an 
enemy with a weapon attack (whether melee or ranged), 
that enemy is considered f lanked by you for the purpose 
of adjudicating your allies’ attacks. For example, if your 
rogue ally attacked that enemy, not only would she gain 
a  +2  bonus  on  her  melee  attack  roll  but  she  could  also  
add  her  sneak  attack  
damage to a successful 
melee attack.
     This     fl  anked  condition  
lasts until either the enemy 
is attacked by one of your 
allies  or  until  the  start  of  
your  next  turn,  whichever  
comes fi  rst. This is an extraor-
dinary ability.
    This ability has no effect on 
creatures that can’t be fl  anked.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Archer
Elf Ranger
          Ability     Scores:     Str 12, Dex 17, Con 12, 
Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 8.
          Skills:     Climb, Hide, Listen, Move 
Silently, Spot, Survival.
          Feat:     Point Blank Shot, Track.
          Weap o ns :     Longsword (1d8/19–20), 
longbow  with  20  arrows  (1d8/×3,  
10 0 ft.).
     Armor:     Studded leather (+3 AC).
          Other     Gear:     Standard adven-
turer’s kit, 19 gp.
Package 2: The Hunter
Half-Elf Ranger
          Ability     Scores:     Str 12, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 10, 
Wis 13, Cha 8.
          Skills:     Hide, Knowledge (nature), Listen, Move 
Silently, Spot, Survival.
     Feat:     Alertness, Track.
     Weap o ns :     Longsword  (1d8/19–20),  dagger  (1d4/19–20,  10  
ft.), longbow with 20 arrows (1d8/×3, 100 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 17 gp.
Package 3: The Skirmisher
Human Ranger
     Ability     Scores:     Str 12, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb,  Heal,  Hide,  Jump,  Move  Silently,  Spot,  
Survival.
     Feats:     Dodge, Mobility, Track.
     Weap o n:     Longsword (1d8/19–20), short sword (1d6/19–20), 
3 javelins (1d6, 30 ft.)
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 5 gp.
Soveliss, Ranger 
of the Solstice Glade
Illus. by C. Frank
620_95374_Ch2.indd   55620_95374_Ch2.indd   552/8/06   3:12:48 PM2/8/06   3:12:48 PM

56
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
ROGUE
The world owes you a living.
     You are the ultimate opportunist, keeping your eyes open 
for the next big chance to come your way. Fortune favors the 
bold, and while you might not always fi  ght with noteworthy 
valor, you certainly have the boldest of aspirations.
     You  are  a  trickster,  a  rapscallion,  a  scoundrel.  You  don’t  
fi  ght fair, and if you can help it, you don’t fi  ght at all. Stealth, 
guile, and daring are your weapons. Why fi  ght when another 
act  of  daring—such  as  an  impossible  climb  or  a  brazen  
bluff—might serve to help you pass an obstacle and deliver 
the prize into your hands?
     Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Artisan, Drifter, Gutter-
snipe, Mariner.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Challenger, 
Daredevil, Explorer, Mercenary, Orphan, Rebel, Renegade, 
Simple Soul, Strategist, Trickster, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Braggart: You have a true gift for self-aggrandizement and 
letting your mouth run away from you. Sometimes this can 
lead to trouble, but let’s face it: Anyone as clever, quick, and 
good-looking as you should be renowned for her deeds, and 
shouldn’t knuckle under in the face of so-called authority. 
If some jumped-up constable or high so-called noble doesn’t 
like the way you carry yourself, it’s his problem, not yours. 
He probably wishes he had half your charm and style.
     Take every opportunity to insult, belittle, and deride your 
enemies. What better way to show off your wit and inventive-
ness, while entertaining your friends? Don’t let a combat pass 
without a quip.
    “Are you trying to kill me with your axe or your breath, you 
malodorous fi end?”
    “Hey, you dried-up old husk of a wizard! You wanted to live 
forever looking like that?”
 “Where’s the evil plan? Come on, you’ve got to have an evil 
plan! How can you call yourself a crazed cultist if you don’t have 
an evil plan?”
     Make sure stories told about your deeds refl  ect well on you; 
if part of the story is a little boring or doesn’t cast you in a 
good light, there’s no harm in adding some embellishment. 
There’s no conversation that can’t be improved by talking 
about yourself a little—or a lot. You’re the most interesting 
person around, after all.
     “Was Lord Gerrat there when I stole the Dragon Egg Ruby from 
under a demilich’s skull? Did he stand next to me when I faced 
down the frost giant jarl with nothing but this kukri so that my 
friends could get away? Then Lord Gerrat can wait a few hours, 
because I’m not leaving this tavern while the music’s still playing 
and everyone is dancing.”
    “Yes, yes, that’s all very interesting, but let’s talk about me.”
 Above  all,  maintain  your  self-confi  dence!  If  you  don’t  
believe in yourself, who will? People exaggerate their troubles, 
so you should feel free to whittle them back to size.
     “Oh, sure I’ve fought dragons before! Great big ones, fi  re-breathing 
of course, bigger than castles! They’re not so tough.”
     “They just call it the Tomb of Horrors to scare off the morons. It’s 
a sham, a put-on! We’ll walk right in and steal every last copper 
from the place, just you wait and see!”
 Common-Born Hero: You view yourself as a champion 
of the people, fi  ghting against injustice and tyranny with 
a sly sense of humor, a larcenous streak, and an intuitive 
grasp of the art of derring-do. You can’t stand to let a bully 
go unpunished, and most monsters and villains are nothing 
more than particularly big and scary bullies.
     While you are certainly happy to profi  t from your adventures, 
you live for the gratitude and appreciation of the common folk. 
Returning a stolen treasure to its rightful owner—especially 
an owner who is otherwise impoverished—is more satisfying 
than simply enriching yourself. Even if it’s diffi  cult  to  part  
with a hard-won prize, you trust that suitable rewards will 
follow when you do the right thing. You don’t have to give 
away everything you fi  nd, but you should see to it that your 
successful adventures help as many people as possible.
     More so than most other characters, you take an interest in 
the common people you encounter in your travels. Keep a list 
of the minor NPCs you encounter, as wel l as what they need or 
what they want. Ask your DM to provide your character with 
opportunities to meet and help common folk if these are not a 
feature of his game. (DMs will appreciate it if you don’t pester 
them for details on every person in the village, though.)
    “Madam, why so sad? Here, take this gold coin and buy your 
family a feast!”
    “I swear on the blood of my mother, there will be justice in 
this town!”
 Skulk: You’re an artist, not a common thief. You are a bold 
and daring warrior, but instead of putting your faith in iron-
mongery and clumsy charges, you seek victory in the shadows. 
You have no battle cry or trademark move—you don’t want to 
be seen or heard before you strike. Some might question your 
courage, but none can doubt your effectiveness.
     Surprise is your biggest asset, so you are a master of skills 
and talents that let you creep into places where you can take 
your enemy unaware. Seek out opportunities to scout out the 
lay of the land and locate potential enemies without a big, 
noisy party of adventurers at your heels, giving away your 
position and waking up every monster in the dungeon. If 
you can silently take out a weak or unsuspecting foe on your 
own, great—but remember, it’s your job to avoid giving the 
villains a chance to strike back. Make sure you can handle 
anything you start when your allies aren’t at hand.
     You are rarely loud or boastful; you know what you can do, 
and that’s the only measure that counts. You fi  nd it easier to 
speak little and hear much, keeping your opinions to yourself. 
When you do voice an opinion, you tend to be terse and offer 
little or no explanation.
    “I’ll take care of the sentries.”
     “Give me ten minutes to get into position before the rest of you 
storm in.”
     “Five ogres ahead—two sleeping, three more awake. I don’t want 
to leave them behind us.”
 Specialist: You  are  a  consummate  professional.  Master  
of  a  set  of  rare  and  valuable  skills,  you  view  adventures  as  
jobs—nothing more and nothing less. You don’t accompany 
620_95374_Ch2.indd   56620_95374_Ch2.indd   562/8/06   3:12:57 PM2/8/06   3:12:57 PM

57
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
adventuring parties to test yourself against 
ferocious monsters or to halt the dep-
redations of murderous villains. 
You  go  along  for  your  fair  cut  
of the loot, and you have no 
use  for  the  thickheaded  he-
roics of muscle-bound sword 
swingers or crusading zealots. 
If you wind up in a fi  ght,  you  
probably bungled the job.
     Rogue  specialists  come  in  
four  basic  fl  avors:   lockpicks  
(who  concentrate  on  Open  
Lock), trapfi  nders  (who  need  
Search  and  Disable  De-
vice),  swindlers  (who  
use Bluff, Disguise, and 
Gather  Information),  
and acrobats (who rely on 
Balance, Jump, Climb, and Tumble). 
In each case, the key to success is 
your ability to amass a lot of ranks 
in key skills other characters are 
unlikely  to  duplicate.  Magic  can  
eventually obviate the usefulness 
of a swindler, lockpick, or acrobat 
thanks to spells such as charm person 
or levitate, but  trapfi  nders  provide  a  
capability that is ver y hard to replace. 
If you are going to be a specialist, con-
sider being a trapfi  nder  fi  rst.
    Keep  notes  on  various  obstacles  you  
encounter, especially the ones you can’t get 
around or through on your fi  rst try. Someday you’re going to 
go back with the right tools (or perhaps a little more training) 
and defeat each and every one.
     You can be opinionated, and you believe that most obstacles 
can be overcome through the use of your special skills. You 
are confi  dent and pragmatic.
“I never met a lock I couldn’t open.”
“Better let me go fi rst. Otherwise someone’s likely to get killed.”
“Hmmmph. Goblin-work. Shoddy.”
DISRUPTIVE AT TACK
More than perhaps any other character, a rogue’s ability to fully 
contribute to a fi  ght varies dramatically based on the enemies 
she faces. Against a mummy, fl  esh golem, or shambling mound, 
the rogue’s damage-dealing drops precipitously. The disruptive 
attack alternative class feature allows a rogue to be effective 
i n combat against such creat ures by ma king them v ul nerable to 
the attacks of her and her allies. It’s also useful against creatures 
vulnerable to your sneak attacks, creating interesting tactical 
decisions for you in such fi  ghts.
Level: 4th.
Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
uncanny dodge at 4th level. Instead, you gain uncanny 
dodge at 8th level (when you would normally gain improved 
uncanny dodge).
  Benefi  t: Beginning at 4th level, through 
careful study you’re able to fi  nd  exploit-
able fl  aws in any creature’s tactics and 
defenses.  Whenever  you  hit  a  target  
that is fl  at-footed against your attack, 
or whenever you hit a target that you 
fl  ank, you can choose to sacrifi  ce  
your sneak attack damage in 
order to apply a –5 penalty to 
that creature’s AC for 1 round. 
Multiple hits on the same target 
don’t stack. This extraordinary ability 
works even against creatures normal-
ly immune to extra damage from 
sneak attacks, such as undead.
STARTING 
PACK AGE S
Package 1: The Archer
Halfl ing Rogue
          Ability     Scores:     Str  6,  Dex  
17,  Con  12,  Int  13,  Wis  14,  
Cha 10.
Skills: Climb,   Disable   
Device,  Hide,  Listen,  Move  Si-
lently,  Open  Lock,  Search,  
Spot, Tumble.
     Languages: Common, Gob-
lin, Halfl  ing.
     Feat:     Point Blank Shot.
     Weap o n:     Morningstar (1d6/×3), light cross-
bow with 20 bolts (1d6/19–20, 80 ft.).
          Armor:     Studded leather (+3 AC).
Other Gear: Standard adventurer’s kit, thieves’ tools, 10 gp.
Package 2: The Duelist
Elf Rogue
     Ability     Scores:     Str 10, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 8, Cha 13.
    Skills:    Balance, Bluff, Disable Device, Hide, Listen, Move 
Silently, Open Lock, Search, Spot, Tumble.
    Languages: Common, Draconic, Elven, Orc.
     Feat:     Combat Expertise.
     Weap o ns :     Rapier  (1d6/18–20),  dagger  (1d4/19–20,  10  ft.),  
shortbow with 20 arrows (1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, thieves’ tools, 6 gp.
Package 3: The Explorer
Human Rogue
     Ability     Scores:     Str 13, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 8.
     Skills:     Climb, Disable Device, Gather Information, Hide, Jump, 
Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Search, Spot, Tumble.
    Languages: Common, Goblin, Undercommon.
     Feat:     Alertness, Combat Refl  exes.
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d8/×3), morningstar (1d8), light cross-
bow with 20 bolts (1d8/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, thieves’ tools, 5 gp.
Lidda the Sparrowhawk, grandmaster 
of the Red Knives thieves guild
Illus. by R. Spencer
620_95374_Ch2.indd   57620_95374_Ch2.indd   572/8/06   3:13:04 PM2/8/06   3:13:04 PM

58
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
SCOUT
You nav igate d i f fi  cult terrain as easily as a commoner walks 
down a cobbled lane. Your natural talent and intensive train-
ing forged you into the ideal investigator of both the green 
wilds and the dark depths. Where your compatriots fi  nd  them-
selves caught on brambles, tripped 
up  on  potholes,  and  wounded  
by caltrops, you fl  ow, jump, and 
sweep  through  all  distractions  
offered by the mute landscape.
     Your ability to travel into diffi  cult-
to-reach locations complements 
your ability to evade the eyes of 
both friend and foe. You 
are seen only where and 
when  you  choose  
to be.
     Quick,     trackless,     
difficult  to  pin  
down, and able 
to  pierce  both  
physical  barri-
ers and lightless 
expanses, you are 
lethal   when   you   
decide to make your 
presence known, wheth-
er in a direct attack or 
when you make your report to 
the eager company ready to act on 
the intelligence you gathered.
     This class appears in the Complete 
Adventurer supplement.
    Suggested  Backgrounds  (choose  one):  Drifter,  Mariner,  
Soldier.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Daredevil, 
Explorer, Orphan, Rebel, Renegade, Seeker, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
Game Hunter: You eat what you kill, and you’re none too 
fond of fancy meals ser ved in taver ns. To you, hunting animals 
for food in their proper season, by climate, and factoring in 
animal diversity is a philosophy and even a way of life. You’d 
never eat a spawning fi  sh out of season, and you recoil in dis-
gust at the thought of dining on veal or herded animals.
     This means you’re kept busy hunting for your sustenance, 
but  luckily  you  know  how  to  prepare  and  preserve  large  
catches in ways that ensure you can comfortably eat for a 
month or more between big hunts. Of course, you prefer 
fresh game to preserved, so whenever you can give jerky a 
rest in favor of quail, squab, or coney, you take time to set up 
a snare or head into the brush, only to emerge an hour later 
with your fresh prize in hand.
     You are not stingy with freshly caught game, and you know 
many different ways of preparing your catch. You cook for 
your compatriots as much as they’ll allow, and you enjoy 
trying new preparations with natural spices, seasonings, and 
novel presentations.
     “I know a recipe for coney better than anything you’ll ever taste 
in town.”
     “It’s not the season for salmon—don’t insult me by trying to 
serve it.”
 Military Heritage: You come from a military tradition, having 
ser ved either in the king’s ar my or in a large, respected 
mercenary company. You distinguished yourself, 
though you never achieved high rank. On the other 
hand, you were a noncommissioned offi  cer,  
and those who outranked you depended 
upon your scouting expertise.
    Because of your mi l itar y her i-
tage, you are familiar with military 
jargon, and speak of “f lank-
ing maneuvers” and how 
“strategy  is  large  scale  
while tactics are small 
scale.” Moreover, you 
l i ke to assess al l adven-
turing (and perhaps even 
social) situations in terms of 
seven strategic principles that 
served  you  well  while  you  were  
“in service.”
  “Figuring  out  the  objective  is  half  the  
battle.”Once you throw out all distracting 
factors,  what  are  you  really  hoping  
to achieve?
  “With enough munitions, we can 
mount a credible offense.”You’re 
not  afraid  to  pay  for  magic  ar-
rows  and  other  high-quality  
offensive “hardware.”
“Without   cooperation,   we   
have nothing.” You know the value that teamwork and mutual 
aid adds to any dangerous situation. You like to work out 
tactics ahead of time, and to establish who in the party is 
responsible for what duty.
 “We  have  to  concentrate  our  attacks!”  It’s  foolish  to  scatter  
attacks across multiple enemies—if members of your party 
concentrate their attacks on a dangerous foe, that foe would 
be  brought  down  quicker,  and  thus  unable  to  deal  its  own  
damage as long. Then, on to the next foe.
“Always look for tactical advantage, then maneuver to reach those 
positions.” You point out to others in your party where each 
might be positioned for best possible effect. See Tactician on 
page 58 under the warmage character themes.
“Surprise is one of my favorite weapons.” You like to sneak 
ahead and get the lay of the land before engaging enemies.
“Keep it simple! ”Plans are well and good, but complicated 
schemes go out the window the moment the fi rst arrow is 
fi  red. Plans that are too involved almost always collapse.
 Sniper:  You  are  especially  skilled  in  field  craft  and  
marksmanship, allowing you to target selected enemies 
from concealment at range. Ideally, you move into a posi-
tion  against  a  foe  unaware  of  your  presence,  use  as  few  
Deruwyn, Scout Captain 
of the Mithral Delvers
Illus. by E. Fiegenschuh
620_95374_Ch2.indd   58620_95374_Ch2.indd   582/8/06   3:13:13 PM2/8/06   3:13:13 PM

59
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
attacks as possible to down the target, then withdraw without 
being seen.
     Of course, in a confl  ict when you support a larger party of 
adventurers, you do not withdraw, but instead rely on your 
comrades to keep the foe or foes from attacking you directly. 
In return, you concentrate your fi  re against foes most danger-
ous to your party.
     You developed your fi  eld ski l ls on your own, or perhaps you 
were trained in a military detachment of the king’s guard or 
in a special unit fi  elded by a large mercenary company.
 Wo rl d  Tr ave l e r : You’ve seen it al l. Wel l, you’ve seen a lot 
in your travels, and you don’t mind audibly comparing the 
place where you currently fi nd yourself with other places 
you’ve allegedly traveled to. Even when you haven’t physi-
cally traveled to a locale you like to brag about, you indicate 
(if pinned down) that you’ve read all about the locale in 
question; after all, a scout has to keep on top of these sorts 
of things.
 “The way this tower is laid out reminds me of Tarmind Spire. 
Tarmind—the spire was named after the sorcerer who built it—was 
a demonbinder. Tarmind Spire was where he caged all the demons 
he bound. Anyway, keep an eye out for demons.”
 “This waterfall puts me in mind of the Falls of Shandarm. 
Those  falls  plunge  a  hundred  feet  in  a  roaring  cascade  of  white  
whose thunder can be heard for miles. Local tribes cast coins, gems, 
even magic items into it, thinking that their sacrifi ce will grant 
them fortune and long life. I don’t know if that’s true, but there’s 
a fortune hidden below the cataract. Maybe we should search the 
basin here?”
    “Whenever I travel through a mine, I think of the Mines of 
Minwray. The dwarves found the Minwray mine—they didn’t 
delve it themselves. It was a great barrow of interconnected pas-
sages, following the vein of some mysterious mineral, delved by a 
vanished race. By the time the dwarves found it, the mineral was 
completely exhausted. But the dwarves expanded the dig, hoping 
to fi nd some trace of what the mysterious Minwray had mined 
so assiduously.”
     “I hate these deep ravines—did I ever tell you about the Skarvos 
Ravine? Twenty miles long and half a mile deep, the ravine shelters 
a sprawling citadel of crude dark stone in the deepest, darkest root 
of the fi ssure. No one’s ever returned from the citadel who explored 
it, so no one knows what is inside.”
DUNGEON SPECIALIST
The  scout’s  mobility  gives  her  a  signifi  cant  advantage  over  
foes  in  combat.  While  any  scout  can  hold  her  own  in  an  
underground  setting,  some  specifi  cally  train  for  the  dark,  
enclosed  spaces  found  in  dungeon  environments.  If  you  
select  the  dungeon  specialist  alternative  class  feature,  you  
give up some of your speed to t ur n the dungeon into a three-
dimensional  combat  environment.  You’ll  shine  in  small  
rooms and tight corridors, though area spells become a bit 
more dangerous for you.
 Level: 3rd.
 Replaces: By choosing the dungeon specialist alternative 
class feature, you give up both fast movement (normally 
gained at 3rd level and improved at 11th level) and evasion 
(normally gained at 5th level).
 Benefi  t: At 3rd level, you gain a climb speed equal to one-
half your base land speed (rounded down to the next 5-foot 
increment), and you can attack with a light weapon normally 
while climbing. At 11th level, your climb speed improves to 
equal your base land speed.
     Having  a  climb  speed  grants  you  a  +8  racial  bonus  on  
Climb checks and allows you to take 10 on Climb checks 
even i f r ushed or threatened. You also retain your Dex ter it y 
bonus to AC while climbing, and enemies gain no special 
bonus on attacks against you while you are climbing. See 
Movement Modes, MM 311, for more details.
    At 5th level, you learn to use confining areas to your 
advantage.  Whenever  you  are  standing  on  the  ground  and  
adjacent to a wall, you gain a +2 bonus to AC and opponents 
gain no bonus on their attack rolls when fl  anking  you.
    This is an extraordinary ability. You lose both of these 
benefi  ts  when  wearing  medium  or  heavy  armor  or  when  
carrying a medium or heavy load.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Archer
Halfl ing Scout
    Ability    Scores:  Str  12,  Dex  17,  Con  12,  Int  10,  Wis  13,  
Cha 8.
    Skills:    Climb, Disable Device, Hide, Listen, Move Silently, 
Open Lock, Search, Spot.
     Feat:     Point Blank Shot.
     Weap o ns :     Spear (1d6/×3), dagger (1d3/19–20), shortbow 
with 20 arrows (1d4/×3, 60 ft.)
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard  adventurer’s  kit,  thieves’  tools,  
20 gp.
Package 2: The Hunter
Elf Scout
    Ability    Scores:    Str  14,  Dex  17,  Con  10,  Int  10,  Wis  13,  
Cha 8.
    Skills:    Disable Device, Hide, Listen, Move Silently, Open 
Lock, Search, Spot, Survival.
     Feat: Track.
     Weap o ns :     Spear (1d8/×3), throwing axe (1d6, 10 ft.), short-
bow with 20 arrows (1d6/×3, 100 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard  adventurer’s  kit,  thieves’  tools,  
15 gp.
Package 3: The Skirmisher
Human Scout
    Ability    Scores:    Str  14,  Dex  15,  Con  12,  Int  10,  Wis  13,  
Cha 8.
    Skills:    Disable Device, Hide, Jump, Listen, Move Silently, 
Open Lock, Search, Spot, Tumble.
     Feats: Dodge, Two-Weapon Fighting.
     Weap o ns :     Two short swords (1d6/19–20), 5 javelins (1d6, 
30 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard  adventurer’s  kit,  thieves’  tools,  
30 gp.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   59620_95374_Ch2.indd   592/8/06   3:13:23 PM2/8/06   3:13:23 PM

60
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
SORCERER
You weave spells like poets compose sonnets. You require 
no dusty tomes, no grueling apprenticeships, no protracted 
study  of  arcane  phenomena—all  you  need  is  your  inborn  
talent to wield raw magic.
    As a child, you knew you were different from others, and 
when you uttered your fi rst spontaneous spell, your suspi-
cions were confi  rmed—sorcery infused your blood!
    But where did this awesome gift arise from? Could it be 
a mere knack, or is it true that you can claim dragons as 
ancestors? It might be that your ability to manifest magic 
through  mere  force  of  will  is  your  inheritance  from  those  
ancient creatures.
     Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Artisan, Ascetic, Drifter, 
Noble Scion.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Companion, 
Daredevil, Innocent, Mercenary, Orphan, Renegade, Royalty, 
Sage, Seeker, Simple Soul, Wanderer.
CHARACTER 
THEMES
One or more of the following 
character themes could apply 
to you.
Mysterious  Stranger: 
No one knows the real you, 
and you prefer to keep it that 
way.  Though  you  have  allies,  
and  might  even  have  a  few  
friends, your background 
is a mystery to all.
     Of  course,  in  the  ab-
sence  of  fact,  rumor  and  
legend  rush  to  fi ll  the 
void.  While  you  might  
not  actively  spread  mis-
information,  it  pleases  
you to hear others tell fan-
tastic  stories  about  where  
(and how) you were bor n or 
raised, your exploits, and the 
true extent of your powers.
    When  other  characters  ask  
about your background, don’t ever 
give  a  straight  reply.  Dance  around  
the truth, making ominous statements in place 
of  answers.  Let  them  believe  what  they  would  
like—and let your actions give them every reason 
to believe the most fantastic possibilities.
     A few ranks of Bluff (and/or cross-class ranks of Intimidate) 
are particularly useful for pulling off this theme. In keeping 
your secrets, it’s useful to be able to lie directly to someone’s 
face,  or  to  stare  someone  in  the  face  until  he  or  she  slinks  
away nervously.
“Many before you have pondered my origin. Your questions, like 
those, must remain unanswered . . . for your own safety.”
“You wouldn’t be the fi  rst to make the mistake of underestimating 
my power.”
 Genealogist: You amass oral histories, search records, 
and seek out family stories to discover the truth about your 
ancestors and living relatives. Though your overall goal 
is to prove that you are indeed descended from dragons, 
you’ve acquired a lot of secondary knowledge concerning 
now-defunct kingdoms, the movement of people across the 
landscape, great wars and philosophical movements, and 
other historical curiosities.
    While still ongoing, your search of your family his-
tory  has  led  you  to  uncover  distant  cousins  and  even  a  
few buried family secrets. For instance, you learned that 
your great grandfather didn’t die in service to the king’s 
guard as everyone believes. It turns out he shipped to sea 
with a privateer. Over the course of decades, he worked 
to become the captain of his own ship. You’ve never been 
able to discover the final fate of your grandfather’s ship, 
but  you  are  constantly  on  the  lookout  for  
fresh information.
                    Despite     the     interesting     revelations     
you  discover  and  the  people  you  
now know you can count as distant 
relatives, your true quest remains: 
You’ve  never  once  turned  your  
mind from the thought of your 
dragon ancestry.
    “My grandfather had secrets 
that no one could have guessed. 
I wonder if he had a hidden 
hoard?”
       “You’d do well to learn 
your own ancestry. How do 
you truly know what you are 
if you don’t know from where 
you’ve come?”
 Misunderstood Rebel: 
You’ve  never  fit  in.  No  
one  understands  you,  
and  truth  to  tell,  you  
don’t care anymore. Your 
dark, brooding clothing, 
pale features, and much-
tattooed  flesh  is  part  
of  who  you  are,  and  if  
people can’t accept that, it’s 
their problem, not yours. Moreover, 
you relish locations that others find horror-
inducing,  including  necropolises,  haunted  
citadels,  and  cursed  cathedrals.  Though  you  
still  draw  breath,  you  feel  as  if  you  have  something  in  
common  with  ghosts,  vampires,  and  other  humanoid-
shaped undead—although none have yet seemed overly 
interested  in  doing  anything  other  than  attempting  to  
kill you.
    You have a knack for writing dark and dismal tales, and 
whether  with  pen  or  out  loud,  you  have  composed  several  
stories featuring cursed families, being buried alive, and the 
fall of cities into hellish rifts.
“Who cares? ”
Hennet, master sorcerer 
of the Emerald Flame
Illus. by H. Lyon
620_95374_Ch2.indd   60620_95374_Ch2.indd   602/8/06   3:13:30 PM2/8/06   3:13:30 PM

61
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
    “I wrote a story once about a girl who was dead for a year and 
never knew it. . . .”
 Pretender: This character theme relies on you having 
taken 1 or more ranks in Bluff. Your natural charisma leads 
you into making preposterous, but somehow reasonable-
sounding claims regarding a wide variety of topics.
    You most effectively use this talent when playing games 
of chance, especially cards. For instance, when playing the 
high-stakes game of three-dragon ante, your ability to bluff 
effectively is a tactic you’ve come to rely on when you want 
to make the other players believe your weak hand is strong, 
or that your strong hand is weak, depending on how the 
dragons fall.
    However, when you are faced with stressful situations, 
your propensit y to invent answers to hard questions out of 
whole cloth could get you into trouble at least as often as it 
helps. For example, when chal lenged by g uards asking for 
credentials necessary to allow you and your friends past 
some threshold, you launch into a song-and-dance meant 
to distract:
 “Well, of course I’d normally give you the countersign, but didn’t 
you get the news? Spies are about, invisible, just waiting to overhear 
someone give the countersign at this entry. Can you imagine if they 
learned  the  countersign?  Can  you  imagine  if  it  was  because  you  
required me to give it to you now?”
 “The Grand Duke sent for me. Don’t give me any claptrap 
about not knowing who I am or that I am not on the list—the 
Grand Duke asked for me by name! If you don’t let me past 
RIGHT now, I can guarantee that when I finally do see the 
Duke  a  half-hour  from  now  because  you’ve  delayed  me,  I’ll  
tell him right off I was delayed because of YOU! What’s your 
name, guard?”
METAMAGIC SPECIALIST
With a limited selection of spells at his fi  ngertips, it’s natural 
for a sorcerer to turn to metamagic feats to gain fl  exibility  
in effects. If the idea of playing a sorcerer who effi ciently 
twists his spells into new shapes and sizes excites you, the 
metamagic specialist alternative class feature is the way to 
go. Though you must forgo the benefi  ts of a fami l iar to pursue 
this path, some sorcerers relish not having to keep track of 
such a vulnerable accessory.
 Level: 1st.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
a familiar.
 Benefi  t:  You  can  apply  metamagic  feats  that  you  know  
to sorcerer spells without increasing the casting time. This 
benefi t even lets you quicken your sorcerer spells with the 
Quicken Spell feat.
    You can use this class feature a number of times per day 
equal  to  3  +  your  Int  modifi  er  (minimum  1).  This  is  an  
extraordinary ability.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Battle Mage
Gnome Sorcerer
    Ability    Scores:    Str  10,  Dex  13,  Con  16,  Int  8,  Wis  10,  
Cha 15.
    Skills:    Concentration.
     Feat:     Toug h nes s .
     Weap o n:     Spear (1d6/×3), dagger (1d3/19–20, 10 ft.), light 
crossbow with 20 bolts (1d6/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 14 gp.
    Spells    Known:    1st—mage armor, ray of enfeeblement, shock-
ing grasp; 0—acid splash, daze, detect mag ic, read mag ic, touch 
of fatigue.
Package 2: The Blaster
Halfl ing Sorcerer
    Ability    Scores:    Str  6,  Dex  15,  Con  14,  Int  12,  Wis  10,  
Cha 15.
    Skills:    Bluff, Concentration, Knowledge (arcana).
    Languages: Common, Draconic, Halfl  ing.
     Feat:     Spell Focus (evocation).
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d6/×3), dagger (1d3/19–20, 10 ft.), 
light crossbow with 20 bolts (1d6/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 11 gp.
    Spells    Known:    1st—color spray, magic missile, obscuring mist; 
0—acid splash, detect magic, disrupt undead, light, ray of frost.
Package 3: The Infernal Summoner
Human Sorcerer
    Ability    Scores:    Str  8,  Dex  13,  Con  14,  Int  12,  Wis  10,  
Cha 15.
     Skills:     Bluff, Concentration, Knowledge (arcana), Spellcraft.
    Languages: Common, Infernal.
     Feats:     Infernal Sorcerer Heritage, Infernal Sorcerer Howl.
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d6/×3), dagger (1d3/19–20, 10 ft.), 
light crossbow with 20 bolts (1d6/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 11 gp.
    Spells    Known:    1st—grease,  mage  armor,  summon  monster  I; 
0—acid splash, detect magic, daze, message, read magic.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   61620_95374_Ch2.indd   612/8/06   3:13:39 PM2/8/06   3:13:39 PM

62
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
SWASHBUCKLER
You’ll  do  nearly  anything  on  a  dare,  going  so  far  as  to  risk  
your life to prove your panache. You have a style all your own. 
Agile and swift, witty and charming, you are the toast of the 
town wherever you go, although sometimes your antics earn 
you the displeasure of authority fi gures and the annoyance 
of your more conservative compatriots.
    Luckily, you excel both with your swift blade and your 
equally agile tongue. You can charm even the most stone-
hearted long enough to make your getaway.
     Seeking  fame,  praise,  and  perhaps  hoping  to  right  the  
occasional injustice, you leap into action, glorying in the life 
of a famous hero.
     This class appears in the Complete Adventurer supplement.
     Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Dr i fter, Gladiator, Mar i-
ner, Noble Scion.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Challenger, 
Daredevil, Rebel, Trickster, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Avenger: Someone wronged you in the past, and you’ve 
made  it  your  mission  to  put  that  misdeed  right  and  bring  
justice, or at least vengeance, to bear. You can be heard fre-
quently muttering the name of the person whom you blame 
for your present state. You keep your blade especially sharp, 
you like to explain to anyone who will listen, so that when 
the time comes for you to exact justice, your foe’s blood will 
soak the earth. See the Driven Avenger on page 54 under the 
ranger character themes.
    “I keep a special blade as sharp as a dragon’s tooth for the fi nal 
blow I’ll strike.”
    “If justice can’t be mine, then I claim vengeance.”
 Braggart: You are given to making incredible claims and 
boasts. See the rogue character theme of the same name on 
page 56.
 Clothes Horse: You dress in conspicuous, fl  ashy  clothes.  
Dun-colored leather, gray, and tan—these are colors for 
dullards. You prefer brilliant red, hunter green, navy blue, 
snowy white, and coal black, but color alone doesn’t make 
the ensemble—it is the fashion!
     Though a courtier’s outfi  t will set you back 30 gold pieces, 
you own several widely different sets. On the days when you 
are less likely to soil your clothing in sewer water or in the 
blood of your foes, you trot out your fi  nest  noble  outfi  ts,  made  
pricier by your personalized touches.
    “Take a care you don’t get any of your blood on my new silk 
doublet, you knave!”
 Daredevil: Your audacity sometimes leads you to perform 
dangerous stunts merely to prove to others that few things 
are beyond your reach, when you set your mind to them. 
Sometimes, with enough time and resources, you can rig 
a stunt so that it looks dangerous to onlookers, but actually 
includes hidden safety features. However, your stunts are 
frequently as dangerous as they appear.
 Baiting a Monster: While you are adventuring, sometimes 
a  dangerous  beast  needs  to  be  lured  into  a  particular  
location so it can be dealt with more easily, while other 
times a monster is in too formidable a tactical location to 
attack. That’s when you shine. You declare straightaway 
that you’re up to baiting the creature so that it’ll move in 
the  desired  direction.  Invective  works,  as  does  a  swift  
attack and retreat, but sometimes you end up snatching a 
valuable item and running.
    “You call that a monster? I’ve seen more dangerous claws in a 
barnyard!”
 Master Magician: You claim you can endure anything, even 
being buried alive. Why, you’ve gone a full seven days being 
buried alive in a coffi  n under 6 feet of earth, or so you claim. 
If secretly allowed to make preparations to obtain food (and 
air), or if you can make a deal with a friend with the right 
spells to check up on you now and then, you might just take 
another dare to try eight days!
     “It’s true, that one time I almost died, but that was just to impress 
the ladies.”
 Escapist: You brag that there is no restraint from which 
you can’t free yourself (to employ this character theme, you 
should have 1 or more ranks in Escape Artist). Whether 
manacles,  chains,  ropes,  or  other  restraint  devices,  you  
claim  you’ve  never  been  foiled.  To  keep  your  record  
safe,  you  take  extensive  precautions,  including  keeping  
“rigged” sets of manacles and stocks to practice with, and 
as an extreme, occasionally swallowing a skeleton key 
good for unlocking many types of manacles and vaults. 
When necessary, you can regurgitate the key, though it’s 
an unpleasant process.
     “The Tarterian Depths of Carceri couldn’t hold me. Do you think 
your puny cell has a chance?”
 Leaping a Pit: Ten feet? No problem. Twenty? Just as easy. 
You r f r iends k now t hat fi  ssures are your specialty and rarely 
dare  you  to  span  them,  although  on  occasion  putting  on  a  
little paying show by jumping a horse across a river isn’t out of 
the question. You ta ke it in str ide that it ’s best to have several 
extra healing potions on hand during such an event—after 
all, you’ve learned that your fame actually increases after a 
failed attempt if you are terribly injured.
    “It’s okay . . . it’s not as far across as it looks.”
 Humorist: Your natural charisma leads you to entertain 
your friends and larger groups by making them laugh. You 
employ a wide variety of tools toward this end, including 
jokes, relating amusing situations (sometimes with comedic 
embellishment), or acting the fool.
    “What do you do if an orc attacks you with a crossbow? Pick up 
the crossbow and shoot the orc.”
    “Two orc mercenaries are walking down the street when one 
collapses. He doesn’t seem to be breathing and his eyes are glazed. 
The other rushes up the steps of a nearby temple and fi nds a cleric. 
He gasps: ‘My friend is dead! What can I do?’ The cleric says: ‘Calm 
down, I can help. First, let’s make sure he’s dead.’ The orc rushes 
away, then returns a moment later, cleaning blood off his blade. He 
says, ‘Okay, now what? ’ ”
     “At dinner one night, the goblin child cries, ‘Mommy, Mommy! 
When  are  we  going  to  have  Aunt  Gruma  for  dinner? ’  The  
mother replies, ‘Quiet, we haven’t even finished your grand-
mother yet.’ ”
620_95374_Ch2.indd   62620_95374_Ch2.indd   622/8/06   3:13:46 PM2/8/06   3:13:46 PM

63
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
Negotiator: In some groups, your diplomatic ski l ls exceed 
those  of  your  friends.  See  the  bard  character  theme  of  the  
same name on page 34.
Pretender: Your  natural  charisma  leads  you  
to make preposterous, but somehow reasonable-
sounding claims regarding a wide variety of topics. 
See the sorcerer character theme of the same name on 
page 61.
SHIELD OF BLADES
The typical swashbuckler is best suited to 
fighting a single foe. Some, however, prac-
tice using a pair of light weapons to fend off 
attacks from all around them. The shield of 
blades alternative class feature is designed for swash-
bucklers who fight with two weapons. Though 
it  requires  a  full  attack  action  to  use  the  
ability, the AC bonus applies against all 
attackers  (even  invisible  ones),  unlike  
the dodge bonus gained by the traditional 
swashbuckling style.
Level: 5th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, 
you do not gain the dodge bonus class 
feature (or its improvements at 10th, 
15th, and 20th level).
 Benefi  t:  Beginning  at  5th  level,  you  
become  adept  at  defending  yourself  when  
wielding a pair of light weapons. You gain a +2 shield bonus 
to  your  AC  whenever  you  attack  with  at  least  two  light  
weapons during your turn. (Despite the name of this class 
feature, you can use any light weapon to gain the benefi t, 
even unarmed strikes or natural weapons.) This AC bonus 
lasts until the start of your next turn. This is an extraordi-
nary ability.
     This bonus increases by 1 for every fi  ve levels beyond 5th 
(+3 at 10th level, +4 at 15th level, and +5 at 20th level). You 
lose  this  bonus  when  wearing  medium  or  heavy  armor  or  
when carrying a medium or heavy load.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Destroyer
Half-Orc Swashbuckler
    Ability    Scores:  Str  15,  Dex  15,  Con  10,  Int  12,  Wis  8,  
Cha 10.
    Skills:    Climb, Escape Artist, Jump, Tumble, Swim.
    Languages: Common, Abyssal, Orc.
     Feats:  Two -We a p o n   Fi g ht i n g ,   We a p o n   Fi n e s s e .
     Weapons:     Two short swords (1d6/19–20), dagger (1d4/19–20, 
10 ft.).
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 13 gp.
Package 2: The Duelist
Human Swashbuckler
    Ability    Scores:    Str 13, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 8, 
Cha 12.
     Skills:     Balance, Bluff, Diplomacy, Escape Artist, Jump, Sense 
Motive, Tumble.
    Languages: Common, Elven, Goblin.
     Feats: Combat Expertise, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus 
(rapier).
     Weap o ns :     Rapier (1d6/18–20), dagger (1d4/19–20, 10 ft.).
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 13 gp.
Package 3: The Skirmisher
Elf Swashbuckler
    Ability    Scores:    Str  13,  Dex  17,  Con  10,  Int  14,  Wis  8,  
Cha 10.
     Skills:     Balance, Bluff, Climb, Escape Artist, Jump, Tumble.
    Languages: Common, Elven, Orc, Sylvan.
     Feats:     Dodge, Weapon Finesse.
     Weap o ns :     Rapier  (1d6/18–20),  dagger  (1d4/19–20,  10  ft.),  
two javelins (1d6, 30 ft.).
    Armor:    Chain shirt (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 11 gp.
Meara Swiftblade, Q ueen’s champion
Illus. by L. Parillo
620_95374_Ch2.indd   63620_95374_Ch2.indd   632/8/06   3:13:53 PM2/8/06   3:13:53 PM

64
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
WAR LOCK
You deal w ith things other people cannot even imagine. Only 
through  your  determination  and  willpower  do  you  resist  
being utterly consumed by the dark power you wield. You 
walk the earth, free to work good or evil with your so-called 
gift. But even if you choose to resist evil’s lure, it is a struggle 
you must win each and every day of your life.
     Magic is a part of your being in a way that not even the most 
powerful sorcerer or wizard will ever know. In your heart burns 
a strange and terrible font of power, giving you the ability to 
perform uncanny feats with only a fl  ick of the wrist or a wave 
of the hand to show for it. You are capable enough in battle, 
but your real strength lies in your ability to bedevil and blight 
your enemies with a variety of noxious curses and sinister 
tricks. Few people care to associate with you—but those who 
do fi  nd you to be a capable companion indeed.
    This class appears in the Complete Arcane supplement.
     Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Ascetic, Drifter, Gutter snipe.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Challenger, Daredevil, 
Orphan, Renegade, Strategist, Theorist, Trickster, Wanderer.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
Hellion: You are an enfant terrible, a troublemaker who 
cares  nothing  for  the  expectations  or  sensibilities  of  the  
people around you. You delight in scandalizing those who 
seek to censure your behavior.
     Never  apologize  for  your  actions  or  conceal  your  true  
nature. If the common folk are frightened of warlocks, let 
them be frightened! You savor the taste of their fear. When 
dealing with the powerful, dispense with etiquette and tact 
and speak your mind. You take pleasure in the gasps of shock 
and daggerlike glances of those who think you’re uncouth. 
The unwritten rules of discourse and behavior are silly and 
outmoded anyway, so you fl  aunt them at every opportunity. 
You don’t need to be obscene, vile, or gross, but you feel no 
need to moderate your behavior or watch your words.
“All power is evil. Haven’t you learned that yet?”
“Stand aside, constable! No one stops me from going where I like 
and doing what I please! Or would you prefer to be a toad?”
“You’d like my head on a pike, would you? Well, here it is— come 
take it if you can! Otherwise, leave me be!”
Possessed: You are a plaything for the sinister powers that 
created you. Several different spirits or personas constantly 
vie for control of your body. Your own persona rarely loses 
control outright, but its dominance is shaky enough that 
other personas can speak, gesture, or even force you to begin 
various actions before you manage to regain control.
     For example, you fi  nd yourself leveling your wand of light-
ning bolt at your ally’s back before you drag down your wand 
hand with your other arm. You threaten yourself with vile 
oaths and imprecations. You might even wake up to fi  nd  that  
you are far from the place where you went to sleep, and people 
tell you that you did and said things you have no memory of. 
All in all, you present a profoundly unnerving spectacle.
     Ma ke strange, unconnected gest ures at the gaming table. 
Point a pencil or pen at one of your fellow players, and then 
suddenly “notice” that your hand is doing something you didn’t 
want it to and pul l it down. Create several distinct voices that 
argue with each other. Make sure the other players know what 
you’re doing so they don’t have you committed; remember, 
a little bit of this sort of behavior goes a long way.
     When roleplaying a warlock with this trait, you don’t have 
to  betray  your  friends  or  take  actions  harmful  to  yourself  
or  your  allies.  But  you  should  certainly  say  things  that  are  
incongruous with the actions you perform.
“I can hold off the ogres, but only if the elf dies fi rst. No, wait, he’s 
my friend. Defi nitely the ogres fi rst.”
Reformed: You have done ter r ible w rongs in your l i fe. You 
have mocked the holy, plundered the weak, harried the just, 
and murdered the innocent. But now you repent of the evil 
you  infl  icted  on  the  world,  and  earnestly  strive  to  atone  for  
your many crimes. By turning the powers of darkness against 
other evildoers, you hope to make amends as best you can.
    In your travels, you might encounter those who know of 
your evil past. Such people might assume that your reforma-
tion is nothing more than a cynical attempt to escape justice, 
or perhaps a cruel sham designed to provide you with oppor-
tunities to indulge in even greater wickedness than before. In 
some lands you are reviled, and you walk abroad at no small 
r isk of impr isonment or execution. In al l fair ness, you deser ve 
such treatment after what you did.
“I’ve done . . . great evil. Those deeds darkened my soul, and every 
day I do all I can to erase that stain.”
Morthos, warlock of the Ebon Tower
Illus. by L. Parillo
620_95374_Ch2.indd   64620_95374_Ch2.indd   642/8/06   3:14:01 PM2/8/06   3:14:01 PM

65
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
 Supernatural Stricture: You are a supernatural creature, 
and you are subject to laws and strictures that other adven-
turers  never  experience.  Others  might  think  of  these  as  
superstitions or taboos, but for you they are immutable laws. 
For instance, you must choose a random way to go anytime 
you encounter a crossroads, unless someone tells you the way. 
(City  streets  and  dungeon  corridors  don’t  usually  count  as  
crossroads.) You refuse to enter a home without an invitation. 
Domestic animals panic at your approach. You refuse to set 
foot on sacred ground, or you cannot look a blue-eyed person 
in the face. Whatever your str ict ure is, it rarely puts your l i fe 
in danger, but it is occasionally inconveniencing to you, and 
memorable to anyone who witnesses your odd behavior.
     There are three basic ways to handle this sort of limitation 
in play.
 Voluntary  Compliance:  You  observe  the  stricture  through  
roleplaying alone.
 Compliance to Avoid a Penalty: You observe the stricture 
because violating it would bring about a minor penalty.
 Inviolable Law: You are absolutely incapable of defying 
the stricture.
    Ideally, a supernatural stricture should, on rare occasions, 
force you to choose or avoid an action that most other characters 
would not give a second thought. If you get lost at crossroads, 
you might have to wait for hours at a lonely intersection in the 
countryside for someone to come along and show you which 
way to go. If you make domestic animals panic, you might 
fi nd it impossible to ride a horse, and thus walk instead of 
ride when traveling overland.
     “I’m sorry, but I may not cross this threshold without an invita-
tion. Won’t you invite me in?”
FIENDISH FLAMEWREATH
By their very nature, a warlock’s powers are unusual and unpre-
dictable. Some warlocks manifest a visible sign of their fi  endish  
prowess, developing the ability to wreathe themselves in burning 
fl  ames to deal damage to at tackers. Giv ing up your fast heal ing 
means you’re less capable of bouncing back after a fi  ght, but the 
deterrence factor of the fi  endish  fl  amewreath  alternative  class  
feature might result in you taking less damage entirely.
 Level: 8th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the fi endish resilience class feature normally gained at 8th 
level  (or  the  improvements  to  that  class  feature  gained  at  
13th and 18th level).
 Benefi  t: Beginning at 8th level, you know the trick of fi  end-
ish fl  amewreath. Once per day you can immolate yourself in 
wispy fl ames that don’t hurt you but deal 1d6 points of fi  re  
damage to any creature striking you with its body or a hand-
held weapon. Creatures wielding weapons with exceptional 
reach, such as longspears, are not subject to this damage if 
they attack you.
     Activating your fi  endish  fl  amewreath is a free action; it lasts 
for 2 minutes or until you take another free action to end it. 
The fl ames provide light equivalent to a torch, but can’t be 
extinguished except by you. This is a supernatural ability.
     At 13th level, your fi  endish  fl  amewreath deals 2d6 points of 
fi  re damage. At 18th level, the damage improves to 5d6 points.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Blaster
Halfl ing Warlock
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 10, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Concentration, Knowledge (arcana), Spellcraft.
    Languages: Common, Goblin, Halfl  ing.
     Feat: Point Blank Shot.
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d6/×3), dagger (1d4/19–20, 10 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 28 gp.
     Invocations: Least—eldritch blast, frightful blast.
Package 2: The Controller
Elf Warlock
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 10, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Bluff, Concentration, Intimidate.
    Languages: Common, Elven, Orc.
     Feat: Necropolis Born (Complete Arcane).
     Weap o n:     Morningstar (1d8).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 29 gp.
     Invocations: Least—eldritch blast, miasmic cloud.
Package 3: The Problem Solver
Human Warlock
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 10, Cha 15.
     Skills:     Bluff, Concentration, Spellcraft, Use Magic Device.
    Languages: Common, Infernal.
     Feats:     Communicator (Complete Arcane), Skill Focus (Use 
Magic Device).
     Weap o ns :     Longspear (1d8/×3), morningstar (1d8), two dag-
gers (1d4/19–20, 10 ft.).
    Armor:    Studded leather (+3 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Standard adventurer’s kit, 20 gp.
     Invocations: Least—devil’s sight, eldritch blast.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
SUPERNATUR AL PENALTIES 
AND BONUSES
Talk with your DM about whether or not you should be subject to 
a penalty for breaking a stricture, and if so, what the right sort of 
penalty should be. Generally, a –1 penalty on caster level or saving 
throws for 24 hours is not unreasonable for breaking a stricture.
    If you are liable to a penalty for your supernatural stricture, 
you are accepting a penalty that offers no benefit other than an 
interesting roleplaying hook. To balance this out, you should 
have a supernatural gift that occasionally provides a modest 
bonus (+1 bonus on caster level or saving throws for 24 hours). 
The gift should be something that is not under your control. For 
example, you might receive the benefit of your gift on the night 
of the new moon, during a thunderstorm, or when you carry a 
lock of hair from a man hanged for murder. Work with your DM 
to create a flavorful and appropriate gift for your warlock.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   65620_95374_Ch2.indd   652/8/06   3:14:10 PM2/8/06   3:14:10 PM

66
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
WAR M AGE
Magic’s application to warfare is more than an academic’s 
theory—it is your life! You dream of blasts of devastating 
magic,  spells  of  steel,  and  the  clarion  horn  calling  the  
warriors to battle. The stamp of marching troops is the 
sound dearest to your ears, though the blast of a fireball 
ripping through the ranks of massed line of enemies has 
its place.
     You graduated near the top of your class from the war col-
lege, where every day you drilled in the dark predawn light, 
through through the heat of the day, until the bugle played 
its nightly signal that today’s training was done. The magic 
of war is ingrained in you, and you ache to release it on the 
battlefi  eld, or in a smal ler skir mish where your ski l ls w i l l be 
all the more visible.
    This class appears in the Complete Arcane supplement.
    Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Gladiator, Noble Scion, 
Soldier.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Chal-
lenger, Leader, Royalty, Strategist.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
Foul-Tempered: A student of hard knocks, you are given 
to bouts of abusive or venomous language, though you pepper 
your speech w ith choice bits of i nvect ive even when you’re not 
blaming a subordinate, censuring a compatriot, or expressing 
your bitter and deep-seated ill will regarding all that walk 
on two and four legs.
     Though  you’ve  been  known  to  swear  a  blue  streak,  
you’ve also learned that using foul language is far more 
effective if rationed—a choice curse or shout at just the 
right moment has far more impact than a constant stream 
of epithets . . . though on occasion the situation calls for 
just such a string of slurs and imprecations. You’ve also 
found that it helps company unity if you swear mostly at 
foes and restrain from apply ing your venomous tong ue to 
your compatriots.
“What are you looking at, cave creeper?”
    “Where to, chief?”
“Idiocy drips from the fool’s mouth.”
     Military Heritage, High Rank: You come from a military 
tradition, hav ing ser ved either in the king’s ar my or in a large, 
respected mercenary company. You distinguished yourself 
and even achieved a reasonably high rank. When you emerged 
from your war college you were commissioned as a company 
grade offi  cer and thus began your service as a lieutenant, but 
soon advanced to captain.
    You still proudly wear the rank insignia of a captain, 
despite having been discharged from the company you 
originally served. You wear the insignia as a shoulder patch. 
Others who served recognize your insignia, and you rec-
ognize theirs.
     Because  of  your  military  heritage,  you  are  familiar  with  
military jargon and make use of it, as well as elements of 
military strategy. See the Military Heritage entry on page 58 
under the scout character themes.
 Military Historian: This character theme requires you 
to have at least 1 rank in Knowledge (history). You are a 
student of confl ict, an expert on the subject of the famous 
battles  between  prehistoric  tribes,  ancient  militaries,  and  
modern  armies  between  kings  and  necromancers.  See  the  
bard character theme of the same name on page 34.
 Tactician: While a military strategy is an overall plan for 
a large confl  ict, tactics are the actual means used to attain a 
goal in a par ticular fi  ght. As someone who achieved the rank 
of captain, you know ef fective tactics and l i ke to employ them 
in a fi  ght, depending on the situation.
Camoufl age: When at all possible, you attempt to hide the 
presence of yourself and your party from potential enemies, 
hoping to discourage ranged weapon accuracy and targeting 
until you can close, or even completely hide from an enemy 
force until you are ready to attack.
 “Change into your darkest clothes, and don’t forget to rub charcoal 
across your faces.”
 Decoy:  One  of  your  favorite  tactics  is  the  use  of  a  decoy.  
Whether  a  spell  that  provides  the  illusion  of  a  powerful  
heroic ally or a monster in your thrall, or just a loud noise 
or fabricated conversation, you use a decoy to distract a foe 
or foes from what is truly important—usually you and your 
group’s true position and strength.
 “We need the illusion of dragon charging their line—then we 
can sneak in around back.”
Arthon, destroyer of hordes
Illus. by S. Ellis
620_95374_Ch2.indd   66620_95374_Ch2.indd   662/8/06   3:14:17 PM2/8/06   3:14:17 PM

67
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
 Ambush: When possible, you prefer to attack your foes from 
concealment when they least expect such an assault. Good 
options  include  striking  from  dense  underbrush  or  fi ring 
ranged weapons from a high position.
     “We have to establish a killing ground, position two groups to cut 
off any escape, and post someone to keep watch so we know when 
to launch the ambush.”
 Frontal Assault: Sometimes, the best tactic is a direct, 
hostile advance toward the foe. The hope is to overwhelm 
the enemy with your strength. However, you know that it’s 
rank stupidity to call for a frontal assault against a foe in a 
fortifi  ed  position.
     “We’ve run out of options. Time for a suicide strike . . . er, frontal 
assault!”
 Pincer  Movement:  If  you  are  with  a  group  large  enough  
to pull it off, and if you’re fi  ghting  a  foe  in  numbers  large  
enough for it to matter, you like to employ a tactic called the 
pincer movement, where you attack the massed fl  anks  of  the  
opponent simultaneously in a pinching motion after your 
foe has committed forward. Your forces ideally respond by 
moving out to surround the foes.
 “Surround them, envelop them, don’t let any escape!”
     Flying     Wedge: In some ways like a frontal assault but more 
refi  ned,  a  fl ying wedge is a charge where all your allies are 
arrayed in a V shape. You put a bruiser at the point of the V, 
hoping to breach the foe’s line; then the following attackers 
can widen the gap. This maneuver carries a certain risk: If 
the foe can slow or pause the wedge, you’ve given your foe 
an opportunity to try a pincer movement of its own.
     “Beat him down, break the line, bowl them over!”
ECLECTIC LEARNING
Some warmages fi nd the limited range of their spell selec-
tion  chafi  ng.  These  characters  yearn  for  the  sorcerer’s  or  
wizard’s utility spells, such as invisibility, dimension door, or 
even the humble detect magic. While you will never have as 
wide  an  access  to  such  spells  as  other  arcane  casters,  the  
eclectic learning alternative class feature gives you at least 
a taste of what your fellow arcanists already enjoy (without 
signifi  cantly watering down your battlefi  eld  focus).
     If  you  take  this  option,  choose  carefully  which  spells  
to learn. Focus on spells that will remain useful as long 
as  possible—while  eagle’s  splendor  might  seem  like  a  good  
choice at 6th level, by the time you can afford a good cloak of 
Charisma you might regret that earlier choice.
 Level: 3rd, 6th, 11th, or 16th.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
the advanced learning class feature normally gained at a 
particular level. The choice you make at one level has no 
bearing on the choice you make at a later level—you could 
choose  eclectic  learning  at  3rd  and  6th  level,  advanced  
learning at 11th level, and then eclectic learning again at 
16th level.
 Benefit: At 3rd, 6th, 11th, or 16th level, you can choose 
to  add  a  new  spell  to  your  list  that  would  normally  be  
outside your area of expertise. The spell must be a sorcerer/
wizard spell, but it can be from any school. The spell is 
treated as being one level higher than normal (for example, 
invisibility, a 2nd-level sorcerer/wizard spell, would be treated 
as a 3rd-level warmage spell for you). You must be capable 
of  casting  spells  of  the  new  spell’s  adjusted  level—for  
instance, you can’t choose a 3rd-level sorcerer/wizard spell 
at 6th level, because the spell is treated as a 4th-level spell 
for you.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Battle Mage
Gnome Warmage
    Ability    Scores:    Str 8, Dex 14, Con 15, Int 12, Wis 8, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Concentration, Intimidate, Spellcraft.
    Languages: Common, Gnome, Goblin.
     Feat: Battle Caster (Complete Arcane).
     Weap o n:     Longspear (1d6/×3).
    Armor:    Scale mail (+4 AC).
    Other    Gear:    Spell  component  pouch,  standard  adven-
turer’s kit.
Package 2: The Blaster
Human Warmage
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 10, Cha 15.
    Skills:    Concentration, Intimidate, Knowledge (arcana), 
Spellcraft.
    Languages: Common, Draconic.
     Feats: Lightning Refl  exes, Spell Focus (evocation).
     Weap o ns :     Spear  (1d8/×3),  light  crossbow  with  20  bolts  
(1d8/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    Leather (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 1 gp.
Package 3: The Sharpshooter
Halfl ing Warmage
    Ability    Scores:    Str  6,  Dex  16,  Con  13,  Int  12,  Wis  10,  
Cha 15.
    Skills:    Concentration, Spellcraft, Spot (cc).
    Languages: Common, Elven, Halfl  ing.
     Feat:     Point Blank Shot.
     Weap o ns :     Spear  (1d8/×3),  light  crossbow  with  20  bolts  
(1d8/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    Leather (+2 AC).
     Other     Gear:     Spell component pouch, standard adventurer’s 
kit, 1 gp.
620_95374_Ch2.indd   67620_95374_Ch2.indd   672/8/06   3:14:26 PM2/8/06   3:14:26 PM

68
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
WIZARD
Given  time  enough,  you  hope  to  discover  every  secret  of  
magic  ever  penned.  The  arcane  secrets  of  the  world  excite  
you  like  nothing  else,  and  the  discovery  of  a  new  tome,  
scroll, or magical treatise makes your heart skip a beat, your 
face fl  ush, and your breath come quick. Each new libram of 
spells you discover is another intellectual fortune, and the 
anticipation of what you’ll fi  nd is nearly as satisfying as the 
actual identifi  cation of a spell wholly new to your library.
    While you hate leaving your sanctum with its library and 
arcane equipment that you use to determine the magical secrets 
of magic items and artifacts, it is good to now and then venture 
from the laboratory and actually utter the incantations, hexes, 
and powerful spells that you prepare daily. The craft you pursue 
is an art, and like any pursuit, it requires practice.
    Suggested Backgrounds (choose one): Artisan, Ascetic, Noble 
Scion.
     Suggested Personality Archetypes (choose one): Agent, Challenger, 
Crusader, Innocent, Mercenary, Renegade, Royalty, Sage, 
Seeker, Strategist, Theorist, Trickster.
CHARACTER THEMES
One or more of the following character themes could apply 
to you.
 Doting Master: Your fami l iar is more than a mere adjunct 
of your power—it is your companion, fr iend, and con fi  dant.  
Whenever you eat, whether informally, or at an inn or even 
at a formal party, you always make certain that your familiar 
samples the best tasting portions of the meal.
     You worry about your familiar’s ability to stay warm, or at 
least fashionable, and so you’ve ordered a few custom pieces 
of clothing with which to outfi t your familiar, including a 
vest, paw (or talon) gloves, and goggles. Whether or not your 
familiar is smart enough to respond, you ask its opinion on 
weighty matters.
     While you are immensely proud of your familiar, you cast 
a critical eye at the familiars of other wizards and arcanists 
who keep pets. You know that your bond with your familiar, 
and better yet the skill your familiar displays, is a refl  ection  
of your worth.
    “Never mind them, Piggin. We know we’re right, even if they 
choose not to bow to our superior knowledge of things arcane.”
     “This pie is succulent! Come, get a taste, Little Browning! Where 
are you?”
    “Look there, Tibb. A raven! So bedraggled, so thin. Poor thing 
looks like it’s on its last feathers, doesn’t it?”
 Evil Curious: You’ve always told yourself that you merely 
enjoy magic—who wouldn’t? It’s the best thing about living, 
isn’t it? But you’ve recently realized that your impulse control 
might not be what it should when it comes to the discovery of 
new tomes and items. No matter how evil the previous owner 
of the item or tome, you can’t help but be curious about the 
spells within.
     However, you also know that tr ue ev il is a lure that can cage 
your mind and w i l l just as ef fectively as an i l l ithid can, and it 
can consume all your good works and past accomplishments. 
To avoid that fate, you constantly look for items and or spells 
that might serve as an “insulator” so that you can study evil 
tomes and items with some amount of spiritual protection. 
You’ve heard that such spells exist, however fallible, and you 
intend to fi  nd  them.
    “I have safeguards to protect me against any infl uences beyond 
my own will!”
     “We must understand this if we are going to learn what we need 
to defeat the threat!”
 Knowledgeable: As a master wizard, steeped in the arts 
arcane, you know a lot about a lot, much of which is esoteric 
to your comrades unschooled in wizardry. That is no reason 
not make regular use of your large and mysterious vocabulary 
in day-to-day conversation, or to reference various entities 
of  great  power  and  or  wizardly  signifi  cance  when  you  are  
surprised or otherwise disturbed.
 You are also familiar with a great many tomes and don’t 
mind referencing them in regular conversation, especially 
if you claim to have penned a few of your own.
    “By the silver scales of the Denebic Water Dragon!”
    “Just as the gaze of Shandalfar pierces any murk . . .”
     “If the dread power of the Spell of Utter Ruination could be used 
as a measure . . .”
     “If I knew the words to the Citrine Wall of Finality, things would 
be different here, but . . .”
     “This  path  reminds  me  of  the  Twelve  Unsolvable  Mazes  of  the  
Demon King Tatharok.”
     “Oh ho! You’d argue with the author of The Power of the Wizard—
The Earth, The Planes, and the Magical Path to Enlightenment?”
     “I don’t hold too much with the mysticism infused with the spells 
discussed in Drawing Down the Moon, or any mysticism, really. 
I’m more about the art, not the theory.”
     “Well, according to what I’ve read in Magical Monsters: A Besti-
ary of Fearsome Creatures . . .”
IMMEDIATE MAGIC
Other than having a single additional spell of each spell level, 
a  specialist  wizard  functions  like  any  other  wizard.  Your  
evoker’s fi reball spel l deals as much damage as that of a conjurer, 
diviner, or necromancer, and doesn’t look any different. By 
taking the immediate magic alternative class feature, you 
gain a useful trick that sets you apart from other specialists. 
Though giving up your familiar is a hardship, it means you 
have one less thing to worry about in a fi  ght.
 Level: 1st.
 Replaces: If you select this class feature, you do not gain 
a familiar.
 Benefit: You gain a spell-like ability that ref lects your 
chosen school of magic. Activating this abi l it y is an immedi-
ate action, and you can use this spell-like ability a number of 
times per day equal to your Intelligence bonus (minimum 
1). Its equivalent spell level is equal to one-half your wizard 
level (minimum 1st), and the caster level is your wizard level. 
The save DC (if any) is equal to 10 + 1/2 your wizard level + 
your Int modifi  er. This is an extraordinary ability.
     You can’t activate this ability in response to an attack that 
you aren’t aware of. For instance, if an invisible rogue strikes 
at you, you can’t activate urgent shield to gain a bonus to your 
AC against the attack. All effects last until the start of your 
next turn unless otherwise noted.
Illus. by S. Prescott
620_95374_Ch2.indd   68620_95374_Ch2.indd   682/8/06   3:14:33 PM2/8/06   3:14:33 PM

Heroes battle the hordes 
of the Abyss
620_95374_Ch2.indd   69620_95374_Ch2.indd   692/8/06   3:14:41 PM2/8/06   3:14:41 PM

70
CHAPTER 2
EXPANDED
CLASSES
     To select this abilit y, you must also choose to specialize in 
a school of magic. The spell-like ability gained depends on 
your specialty (see below).
Urgent Shield (abjuration): You create a temporary shield of 
force that grants you a +2 shield bonus to AC.
Abrupt Jaunt (conjuration): You  telepor t  up  to  10  feet.  You  
can’t bring along any other creatures.
Glimpse Peril (divination): You get a fl  ash of foresight into the 
danger lying in your future. You gain a +2 insight bonus 
on the next saving throw you make before your 
next turn.
Instant Daze (enchantment): When an en-
emy that has HD equal to or less than 
your  wizard  level  makes  a  melee  
attack against you, you can ren-
der him dazed (Will negates). 
This is a compulsion, mind-
affecting ability.
Counterfi re (evocation): 
When a visible enemy 
within  60  feet  tar-
gets you with a ranged 
attack  or  spell,  you  can  
respond with a glowing ar-
row of force. This requires a 
ranged touch attack to hit and 
deals 1d6 points of damage per 
three wizard levels. Both attacks 
resolve  simultaneously  (neither  can  
disrupt the other).
Brief Figment (illusion): You create a 
fi  gment double of yourself (similar 
to mirror  image).  The  image  lasts  
until it is struck or until the start 
of your next turn.
Cursed Glance (necromancy): When 
a visible enemy within 60 feet tar-
gets you with an attack or spell, 
you can respond with a curse. If the 
enemy fails a Will save, he takes a –2 
penalty to AC and on saving throws.
Sudden Shift (transmutation): You temporarily 
change your form to grant yourself a climb, fl  y,  
or swim speed equal to your current land speed. 
If you activate this ability during your turn, it 
lasts until the end of that turn; otherwise it lasts until the 
end of your next turn.
STARTING PACKAGES
Package 1: The Blaster
Elf Wizard (Evoker)
     Ability     Scores:     Str 8, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 15, Wis 12, Cha 10.
     Skills:     Concentration, Knowledge (arcana), Knowledge (the 
planes), Spellcraft.
    Languages: Common, Draconic, Elven, Orc.
     Feats:     Scribe Scroll, Spell Focus (evocation).
     Weap o ns :     Quarterstaff (1d6), shortbow with 20 arrows 
(1d6/×3, 60 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
    Other    Gear:    Spell component pouch, spellbook, standard 
adventurer’s kit, 4 gp.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—burning  hands,  magic  missile,  shield; 
0—detect magic, light, ray of frost.
    Spellbook:    All 0-level spells plus burning hands, mage armor, 
magic missile, obscuring mist, shield.
    Specialty    School:    Evocation  (prohibited  schools:  enchant-
ment, illusion).
Package 2: The Controller
Gnome Wizard (Enchanter)
          Ability     Scores:     Str 6, Dex 13, Con 14, 
Int 15, Wis 10, Cha 14.
          Skills:     Bluff (cc), Concentration, 
Knowledge (local), Spellcraft.
          Languages:  Common,  Dra-
conic, Gnome, Goblin.
  Feats: Scribe  Scroll,  Spell  
Focus (enchantment).
          Weap o ns :     Club   (1d4),   
light crossbow with 20 bolts 
(1d6/19–20, 80 ft.).
          Armor:     None.
          Other     Gear:     Spell compo-
nent pouch, spel lbook, sta nda rd  
adventurer’s kit, 3 gp.
          Spells     Prepared:     1st—charm 
person,  sleep;  0—daze,  light,  
read magic.
          Spellbook:     All  0-level  
spells  plus  charm  person,  
expeditious  retreat,  silent  
image, sleep, shield.
  Specialty School: 
Enchantment  (prohib-
ited schools: conjuration, 
necromancy).
Package 3: The Problem Solver
Human Wizard (Diviner)
Ability Scores: Str 8, Dex 13, Con 14, 
Int 15, Wis 12, Cha 10.
          Skills:     Concentration, Craft (alchemy), Decipher 
Script, Knowledge (arcana), Spellcraft.
    Languages: Common, Draconic, Elven.
     Feats:     Combat Familiar, Grenadier, Scribe Scroll.
     Weap o ns :     Qua r tersta f f (1d6), dagger (1d4/19 –20, 10 f t.), l ight 
crossbow with 20 bolts (1d8/19–20, 80 ft.).
    Armor:    None.
    Other    Gear:    Spell component pouch, spellbook, standard 
adventurer’s kit, 1 gp.
    Spells    Prepared:    1st—cause fear, comprehend languages, protec-
tion from evil; 0—detect magic, light, read magic.
    Spellbook:    All 0-level spells plus cause fear, comprehend lan-
guages, enlarge person, protection from evil, summon monster I.
     Specialty     School:     Divination (prohibited school: evocation).
Archmage Mialee 
of the Seven Stars
Illus. by S. Prescott
620_95374_Ch2.indd   70620_95374_Ch2.indd   702/8/06   3:14:52 PM2/8/06   3:14:52 PM

eats are one of the best ways to customize your 
character. A fi  ghter w ith Exotic Weapon Profi  ciency  
(spiked chain), Combat Expertise, and Improved Trip 
operates in a completely different manner than one with 
Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, and Shot on the Run. 
Feats give you the opportunity to create a unique character 
by supplementing your class’s core abilities or expanding 
your PC in a new direction.
     The following feats supplement those found in Chapter 5 
of the Player’s Handbook. Many of them have feats from that 
book as prerequisites.
GENERAL FEATS
The feats described below are all general feats. Their prereq-
uisites and benefi  ts are summarized on Table 3–1.
ACROBATIC STRIKE
Your dexterous maneuvers and skilled acrobatics allow you 
to slip past a foe’s defenses and deliver an accurate strike 
against him.
 Prerequisite: Tumble 12 ranks.
 Benefit:  If  you  succeed  in  using  Tumble  to  avoid  an  
opponent’s attack of opportunity, you gain a +4 bonus on 
the next attack that you make against that foe as long as the 
attack occurs before the end of your current turn.
 Special: A fi ghter can select Acrobatic Strike as one of 
his fi  ghter bonus feats.
ACTIVE SHIELD DEFENSE
Your expert use of your shield allows you to strike at 
vulnerable foes even when you forgo your own attacks 
in favor of defense.
 Prerequisites:  Proficiency  with  shields,  Shield  
Specialization.
 Benefit:  When  fighting  defensively  and  using  a  
shield, you do not take the standard fi ghting defensively 
penalties on attacks of opportunity.
     When  using  the  total  defense  action  and  a  shield,  
you still threaten the area around you as normal. You 
can make attacks of opportunity with a –4 penalty.
 Normal: You take a –4 penalty on all attacks while 
fi ghting defensively. You cannot attack while using 
the total defense action.
 Special: A fi  ghter can select Active Shield Defense 
as one of his fi  ghter bonus feats.
ADAPTABLE FLANKER
When you and an ally team up against a foe, you 
know how to maximize the threat your ally poses to 
ruin your target’s defenses.
 Prerequisites: Combat Refl  exes,  Vexing  Flanker,  
base attack bonus +4.
71
Illus. by R. HorsleyIllus. by R. Horsley
620_95374_Ch3.indd   71620_95374_Ch3.indd   712/8/06   3:50:14 PM2/8/06   3:50:14 PM

72