CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
113
spiked  chains,  and  whips  are  reach  weapons.  A  reach  weapon  is  a  
melee  weapon  that  allows  its  wielder  to  strike  at  targets  that  aren’t  
adjacent  to  him  or  her.  Most  reach  double  the  wielder’s  natural  
reach,  meaning  that  a  typical  Small  or  Medium  wielder  of  such  a  
weapon  can  attack  a  creature  10  feet  away,  but  not  a  creature  in  an  
adjacent  square.  A  typical  Large  character  wielding  a  reach  weapon  
of  the  appropriate  size  can  attack  a  creature  15  or  20  feet  away,  but  
not adjacent creatures or creatures up to 10 feet away. 
Double  Weapons:  Dire  flails,  dwarven  urgroshes,  gnome  hooked  
hammers,  orc  double  axes,  quarterstaffs,  and  two-bladed  swords  are  
double  weapons.  A  character  can  fight  with  both  ends  of  a  double  
weapon as if fighting with two weapons, but he or she incurs all the 
normal  attack  penalties  associated  with  two-weapon  combat,  just  as  
though  the  character  were  wielding  a  one-handed  weapon  and  a  
light  weapon  (see  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  page  160).  The  character  
can also choose to use a double weapon two handed, attacking with 
only one end of it. A creature wielding a double weapon in one hand 
(such as a human wielding a Small two-bladed sword) can’t use it as a 
double  weapon—only  one  end  of  the  weapon  can  be  used  in  any  
given round. 
Thrown    Weapons:    Daggers,    clubs,    shortspears,    spears,    darts,    
javelins,  throwing  axes,  light  hammers,  tridents,  shuriken,  and  nets  
are  thrown  weapons.  The  wielder  applies  his  or  her  Strength  mod-
ifier to damage dealt by thrown weapons (except for splash weapons, 
such as a vial of acid; see Throw Splash Weapon, page 158). 
It  is  possible  to  throw  a  weapon  that  isn’t  designed  to  be  thrown  
(that  is,  a  melee  weapon  that  doesn’t  have  a  numeric  entry  in  the  
Range Increment column on Table 7–5), but a character who does so 
takes a –4 penalty on the attack roll. Throwing a light or one-handed 
weapon is a standard action, while throwing a two-handed weapon is 
a full-round action. Regardless of the type of weapon, such an attack 
scores a threat (a possible critical hit) only on a natural roll of 20 and 
deals  double  damage  on  a  critical  hit.  Such  a  weapon  has  a  range  
increment of 10 feet. 
Projectile   Weapons:   Light   crossbows,   slings,   heavy   crossbows,   
shortbows,  composite  shortbows,  longbows,  composite  longbows,  
hand  crossbows,  and  repeating  crossbows  are  projectile  weapons.  
Most  projectile  weapons  require  two  hands  to  use  (see  specific  
weapon  descriptions  later  in  this  chapter).  A  character  gets  no  
Strength bonus on damage rolls with a projectile weapon unless it’s 
a   specially   built   composite   shortbow,   specially   built   composite   
longbow,  or  sling.  If  the  character  has  a  penalty  for  low  Strength,  
apply it to damage rolls when he or she uses a bow or a sling. 
Ammunition:   Projectile   weapons   use   ammunition:   arrows   (for   
bows), bolts (for crossbows), or sling bullets (for slings). When using 
a  bow,  a  character  can  draw  ammunition  as  a  free  action;  crossbows  
and   slings   require   an   action   for   reloading.   Generally   speaking,   
ammunition  that  hits  its  target  is  destroyed  or  rendered  useless,  
while  normal  ammunition  that  misses  has  a  50%  chance  of  being  
destroyed or lost. 
Although   they   are   thrown   weapons,   shuriken   are   treated   as   
ammunition for the purposes of drawing them, crafting masterwork 
or  otherwise  special  versions  of  them  (see  Masterwork  Weapons,  
below), and what happens to them after they are thrown. 
Light,  One-Handed,  and  Two-Handed  Melee  Weapons:  This  
designation  is  a  measure  of  how  much  effort  it  takes  to  wield  a  
weapon  in  combat.  It  indicates  whether  a  melee  weapon,  when  
wielded by a character of the weapon’s size category, is considered a 
light weapon, a one-handed weapon, or a two-handed weapon. 
Light: A light weapon is easier to use in one’s off hand than a one-
handed  weapon  is,  and  it  can  be  used  while  grappling.  A  light  
weapon  is  used  in  one  hand.  Add  the  wielder’s  Strength  bonus  (if  
any) to damage rolls for melee attacks with a light weapon if it’s used 
in  the  primary  hand,  or  one-half  the  wielder’s  Strength  bonus  if  it’s  
used in the off hand. Using two hands to wield a light weapon gives 
no  advantage  on  damage;  the  Strength  bonus  applies  as  though  the  
weapon were held in the wielder’s primary hand only. 
An unarmed strike is always considered a light weapon. 
One-Handed:  A  one-handed  weapon  can  be  used  in  either  the  
primary  hand  or  the  off  hand.  Add  the  wielder’s  Strength  bonus  to  
damage rolls for melee attacks with a one-handed weapon if it’s used 
in  the  primary  hand,  or  1/2  his  or  her  Strength  bonus  if  it’s  used  in  
the  off  hand.  If  a  one-handed  weapon  is  wielded  with  two  hands  
during   melee   combat,   add   1-1/2   times   the   character’s   Strength   
bonus to damage rolls. 
Two-Handed:  Two  hands  are  required  to  use  a  two-handed  melee  
weapon   effectively.   Apply   1-1/2   times   the   character’s   Strength   
bonus to damage rolls for melee attacks with such a weapon. 
Weapon  Size:  Every  weapon  has  a  size  category,  such  as  Small,  
Medium, or Large. This designation indicates the size of the creature 
for   which   the   weapon   was   designed.   A   Small   greatsword   is   a   
greatsword  designed  for  a  Small  creature,  such  as  a  halfling.  A  
Medium longsword is a longsword designed for a Medium creature, 
such  as  an  elf.  A  Large  shortbow  is  a  shortbow  designed  for  a  Large  
creature, such as an ogre. 
A  weapon’s  size  category  isn’t  the  same  as  its  size  as  an  object.  A  
Medium dagger (one sized for a Medium character), for instance, is a 
Tiny  object  (see  Table  9–10:  Size  and  Armor  Class  of  Objects,  page  
166).  Instead,  a  weapon’s  size  category  is  keyed  to  the  size  of  the  
intended wielder. In general, a light weapon (such as a dagger) is an 
object  two  size  categories  smaller  than  the  wielder,  a  one-handed  
weapon (such as a longsword) is an object one size category smaller 
than the wielder, and a two-handed weapon (such as a greatsword) is 
an object of the same size category as the wielder. 
Inappropriately  Sized  Weapons:  A  creature  can’t  make  optimum  use  
of  a  weapon  that  isn’t  properly  sized  for  it.  A  cumulative  –2  penalty  
applies  on  attack  rolls  for  each  size  category  of  difference  between  
the  size  of  its  intended  wielder  and  the  size  of  its  actual  wielder.  
Thus, a human wielding a Small dagger takes a –2 penalty on attack 
rolls  (one  size  category  different),  and  an  ogre  wielding  a  Small  
longsword  takes  a  –4  penalty  (two  size  categories  different).  If  the  
creature  isn’t  proficient  with  the  weapon  (a  wizard  attempting  to  
wield  a  Small  battleaxe,  for  instance),  a  –4  nonproficiency  penalty  
also applies. 
The   measure   of   how   much   effort   it   takes   to   use   a   weapon   
(whether  the  weapon  is  designated  as  a  light,  one-handed,  or  two-
handed  weapon  for  a  particular  wielder)  is  altered  by  one  step  for  
each  size  category  of  difference  between  the  wielder’s  size  and  the  
size   of   the   creature   for   which   the   weapon   was   designed.   For   
instance,  a  Small  greatsword  (a  two-handed  weapon  for  a  Small  
creature) is considered a one-handed weapon for a Medium creature, 
or a light weapon for a Large creature. Conversely, a Large dagger (a 
light   weapon   for   a   Large   creature)   is   considered   a   one-handed   
weapon for a Medium creature, or a two-handed weapon for a Small 
creature.  If  a  weapon’s  designation  would  be  changed  to  something  
other  than  light,  one-handed,  or  two-handed  by  this  alteration,  the  
creature can’t wield the weapon at all. 
Improvised   Weapons:   Sometimes   objects   not   crafted   to   be   
weapons  nonetheless  see  use  in  combat—people  fight  with  any-
thing  from  broken  bottles  to  chair  legs  to  thrown  mugs.  Because  
such objects are not designed for this use, any creature that uses one 
in  combat  is  considered  to  be  nonproficient  with  it  and  takes  a  –4  
penalty on attack rolls made with that object. To determine the size 
category and appropriate damage for an improvised weapon, the DM 
should compare its relative size and damage potential to the weapon 
list to find a reasonable match. For instance, a table leg is similar to a 
club,  while  a  broken  bottle  is  similar  to  a  dagger.  An  improvised  
weapon  scores  a  threat  on  a  natural  roll  of  20  and  deals  double  
damage on a critical hit. An improvised thrown weapon has a range 
increment of 10 feet. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
114 
WEAPON QUALITIES 
The weapon a character uses says something about who he or she is. 
You  probably  want  to  equip  your  character  with  both  a  melee  
weapon  and  a  ranged  weapon.  If  you  can’t  afford  both  your  melee  
weapon  of  choice  and  your  ranged  weapon  of  choice,  decide  which  
is more important to the character.  
What  size  of  weapon  you  choose  determines  how  your  character  
can  choose  to  wield  it  (with  one  hand  or  two)  and  how  much  
damage he or she can deal with it. A two-handed weapon deals more 
damage  than  a  one-handed  weapon,  but  wielding  a  two-handed  
weapon  prevents  the  wielder  from  using  a  shield,  so  that’s  a  trade-
off. 
The number of weapons your character is proficient with depends 
on  his  or  her  class  and  race.  A  character  can  also  become  proficient  
with  additional  weapons  by  selecting  the  right  feats.  See  Exotic  
Weapon  Proficiency  (page  94),  Martial  Weapon  Proficiency  (page  
97), and Simple Weapon Proficiency (page 100). 
A  better  weapon  is  usually  more  expensive  than  an  inferior  one,  
but  more  expensive  doesn’t  always  mean  better.  For  instance,  a  
rapier  is  more  expensive  than  a  longsword.  For  a  dexterous  rogue  
with  the  Weapon  Finesse  feat,  a  rapier  is  a  terrific  weapon.  For  a  
typical fighter, a longsword is better. 
When  selecting  your  character’s  weapons,  keep  in  mind  the  fol-
lowing factors (given as column headings on Table 7–5). 
Cost:  This  value  is  the  weapon’s  cost  in  gold  pieces  (gp)  or  silver  
pieces  (sp).  The  cost  includes  miscellaneous  gear  that  goes  with  the  
weapon,  such  as  a  scabbard  for  a  sword  or  a  quiver  for  arrows.  This  
cost  is  the  same  for  a  Small  or  Medium  version  of  the  weapon.  A  
Large version costs twice the listed price. 
Damage:  The  Damage  columns  give  the  damage  you  deal  by  the  
weapon  on  a  successful  hit.  The  column  labelled  “Dmg  (S)”  is  for  
Small  weapons,  such  as  those  typically  wielded  by  a  gnome  or  
halfling.  The  column  labelled  “Dmg  (M)”  is  for  Medium  weapons,  
such  as  those  typically  wielded  by  a  dwarf,  elf,  half-elf,  half-orc,  or  
human.  If  two  damage  ranges  are  given,  such  as  “1d6/1d6”  for  the  
quarterstaff,   then   the   weapon   is   a   double   weapon   (see   Double   
Weapons,  above,  and  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  page  160).  Use  the  
second damage figure given for the double weapon’s extra attack. 
Table 7–4: Tiny and Large Weapon Damage gives weapon damage 
values  for  weapons  of  those  sizes.  For  instance,  a  Tiny  longsword  
(such  as  might  be  wielded  by  a  halfling  or  gnome  fighter  under  the  
effect  of  a  reduce  person  spell)  deals  1d4  points  of  damage,  while  a  
Large greataxe (wielded by a half-orc barbarian under the effect of an 
enlarge   person   spell)   deals   3d6   points   of   damage.   The   Dungeon   
Master’s  Guide  has  more  information  on  weapons  and  combat  for  
creatures smaller than Small and larger than Medium. 
 
Table 7–4: Tiny and Large Weapon Damage 
           Medium           Tiny           Large           
    Weapon Damage  Weapon Damage  Weapon Damage 
               1d2               —               1d3               
               1d3               1               1d4               
               1d4               1d2               1d6               
               1d6               1d3               1d8               
                                  1d8                                  1d4                                  2d6                                  
              1d10              1d6              2d8              
              1d12              1d8              3d6              
                                  2d4                                  1d4                                  2d6                                  
                                  2d6                                  1d8                                  3d6                                  
               2d8               1d10               3d8               
              2d10              2d6              4d8 
 
Critical: The entry in this column notes how the weapon is used 
with the rules for critical hits. When your character scores a critical 
hit,  roll  the  damage  two,  three,  or  four  times,  as  indicated  by  its  
critical  multiplier  (using  all  applicable  modifiers  on  each  roll),  and  
add all the results together. 
Exception:   Bonus   damage   over   and   above   a   weapon’s   normal   
damage, such as that dealt by a sneak attack or the special ability of a 
flaming sword, is not multiplied when you score a critical hit. 
×2: The weapon deals double damage on a critical hit. 
×3: The weapon deals triple damage on a critical hit. 
×3/×4:  One  head  of  this  double  weapon  deals  triple  damage  on  a  
critical hit. The other head deals quadruple damage on a critical hit. 
×4: The weapon deals quadruple damage on a critical hit. 
19–20/×2: The weapon scores a threat (a possible critical hit) on a 
natural  roll  of  19  or  20  (instead  of  just  on  a  20)  and  deals  double  
damage on a critical hit. (The weapon has a threat range of 19–20.) 
18–20/×2: The weapon scores a threat on a natural roll of 18, 19, or 
20 (instead of just on a 20) and deals double damage on a critical hit.  
(The weapon has a threat range of 18–20.) 
19–20/×2: The weapon scores a threat (a possible critical hit) on a 
natural  roll  of  19  or  20  (instead  of  just  on  a  20)  and  deals  double  
damage on a critical hit. (The weapon has a threat range of 19–20.) 
18–20/×2: The weapon scores a threat on a natural roll of 18, 19, or 
20 (instead of just on a 20) and deals double damage on a critical hit.  
(The weapon has a threat range of 18–20.) 
Range  Increment:  Any  attack  at  less  than  this  distance  is  not  
penalized  for  range,  so  an  arrow  from  a  shortbow  (range  increment  
60  feet)  can  strike  at  enemies  up  to  59  feet  away  or  closer  with  no  
penalty. However, each full range increment imposes a cumulative –
2 penalty on the attack roll. A shortbow archer firing at a target 200 
feet  away  suffers  a  –6  penalty  on  the  attack  roll(–2  ×  3,  because  200  
feet  is  at  least  three  range  increments  but  not  four).  A  thrown  
weapon, such as a throwing axe, has a maximum range of five range 
increments. A projectile weapon, such as a bow, can shoot up to ten 
range increments. 
Weight:  This  column  gives  the  weight  of  a  Medium  version  of  
the weapon. Halve this number for Small weapons, and double it for 
Large weapons. 
Type:  Weapons  are  classified  according  to  the  type  of  damage  
they deal: bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing. Some monsters may be 
resistant  or  immune  to  attacks  from  certain  types  of  weapons.  For  
example,  a  skeleton  takes  less  damage  from  slashing  weapons  and  
piercing weapons. 
Some  weapons  deal  damage  of  multiple  types  (for  example,  the  
morningstar,  which  deals  both  bludgeoning  and  piercing  damage).  
If  a  weapon  is  of  two  types,  the  damage  it  deals  is  not  half  one  type  
and  half  another;  all  of  it  is  both  types.  Therefore,  a  creature  would  
have  to  be  immune  to  both  types  of  damage  to  ignore  any  of  the  
damage from such a weapon. 
In  other  cases,  a  weapon  can  deal  either  of  two  types  of  damage  
(such  as  the  dagger,  which  can  deal  either  piercing  or  slashing  
damage).  In  a  situation  when  the  damage  type  is  significant,  the  
wielder  can  choose  which  type  of  damage  to  deal  with  such  a  
weapon. 
Special:  Some  weapons  have  special  features.  See  the  weapon  
descriptions for details. 
 
Weapon Descriptions 
Weapons  found  on  Table  7–5:  Weapons  are  described  below,  along  
with  any  special  options  for  the  wielder  (“you”)  has  for  their  use.  
Splash  weapons  are  described  under  Special  Substances  and  Items,  
page 128. 
Arrows:  An  arrow  used  as  a  melee  weapon  is  treated  as  a  light  
improvised weapon (–4 penalty on attack rolls) and deals damage as 
a  dagger  of  its  size  (critical  multiplier  ×2).  Arrows  come  in  a  leather  
quiver   that   holds   20   arrows.   An   arrow   that   hits   its   target   is   
destroyed;  one  that  misses  has  a  50%  chance  of  being  destroyed  or  
lost. 
Axe,  Throwing:  A  throwing  axe  is  lighter  than  a  handaxe  and  
balanced  for  throwing.  Gnome  fighters  often  use  throwing  axes  for  
both melee and ranged attacks. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
115
Axe, Orc Double: An orc double axe is a double weapon. You can 
fight with it as if fighting with two weapons, but if you do, you incur 
all  the  normal  attack  penalties  associated  with  fighting  with  two  
weapons, just as if you were using a one-handed weapon and a light 
weapon (see Two-Weapon Fighting, page 160). As its name suggests, 
it  is  often  found  in  the  hands  of  powerful  orc  fighters.  A  creature  
wielding  an  orc  double  axe  in  one  hand  can’t  use  it  as  a  double  
weapon—only  one  end  of  the  weapon  can  be  used  in  any  given  
round. 
Battleaxe:  The  battleaxe  is  the  most  common  melee  weapon  
among dwarves. 
Bolas:  A  set  of  bolas  consists  of  two  or  three  heavy  wooden  
spheres  connected  by  lengths  of  cord.  Because  the  bolas  can  wrap  
around  an  enemy’s  leg  or  other  limb,  you  can  use  this  weapon  to  
make a ranged trip attack against an opponent. You can’t be tripped 
during your own trip attempt when using a set of bolas. 
Bolts: A crossbow bolt used as a melee weapon is treated as a light 
improvised weapon (–4 penalty on attack rolls) and deals damage as 
a dagger of its size (crit ×2). Bolts come in a wooden case that holds 
10  bolts  (or  5,  for  a  repeating  crossbow).  A  bolt  that  hits  its  target  is  
destroyed;  one  that  misses  has  a  50%  chance  of  being  destroyed  or  
lost. 
Bullets,   Sling:   Bullets   are   lead   spheres,   much   heavier   than   
stones of the same size. They come in a leather pouch that holds 10 
bullets. A bullet that hits its target is destroyed; one that misses has a 
50% chance of being destroyed or lost. 
Chain,  Spiked:  A  spiked  chain  has  reach,  so  you  can  strike  
opponents  10  feet  away  with  it.  In  addition,  unlike  most  other  
weapons with reach, it can be used against an adjacent foe. 
Because the chain can wrap around an enemy’s leg or other limb, 
you  can  make  trip  attacks  with  the  chain.  If  you  are  tripped  during  
your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  chain  to  avoid  being  
tripped. 
When using a spiked chain, you get a +2 bonus on opposed attack 
rolls made to disarm an opponent (including the roll to avoid being 
disarmed if such an attempt fails). 
You  can  use  the  Weapon  Finesse  feat  (page  102)  to  apply  your  
Dexterity  modifier  instead  of  your  Strength  modifier  to  attack  rolls  
with a spiked chain sized for you, even though it isn’t a light weapon 
for you. 
Club: A wooden club is so easy to find and fashion that it has no 
cost. 
Crossbow,  Hand: This exotic weapon is common among rogues 
and  others  who  favor  stealth  over  power.  You  can  draw  a  hand  
crossbow  back  by  hand.  Loading  a  hand  crossbow  is  a  move  action  
that provokes attacks of opportunity. 
You can shoot, but not load, a hand crossbow with one hand at no 
penalty.  You  can  shoot  a  hand  crossbow  with  each  hand,  but  you  
take  a  penalty  on  attack  rolls  as  if  attacking  with  two  light  weapons  
(see Table 8–10: Two-Weapon Fighting Penalties, page 160). 
Crossbow, Heavy: You draw a heavy crossbow back by turning a 
small  winch.  Loading  a  heavy  crossbow  is  a  full-round  action  that  
provokes attacks of opportunity. 
Normally,   operating   a   heavy   crossbow   requires   two   hands.   
However,  you  can  shoot,  but  not  load,  a  heavy  crossbow  with  one  
hand at a –4 penalty on attack rolls. You can shoot a heavy crossbow 
with each hand, but you take a penalty on attack rolls as if attacking 
with   two   one-handed   weapons   (see   Table   8–10:   Two-Weapon   
Fighting  Penalties,  page  160).  This  penalty  is  cumulative  with  the  
penalty for one-handed firing. 
Crossbow,  Light:  You  draw  a  light  crossbow  back  by  pulling  a  
lever.  Loading  a  light  crossbow  is  a  move  action  that  provokes  
attacks of opportunity. 
Normally,   operating   a   light   crossbow   requires   two   hands.   
Illus. by L. Grant-West 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
116 
However,  you  can  shoot,  but  not  load,  a  light  crossbow  with  one  
hand  at  a  –2  penalty  on  attack  rolls.  You  can  shoot  a  light  crossbow  
with each hand, but you take a penalty on attack rolls as if attacking 
with  two  light  weapons  (see  Table  8–10:  Two-Weapon  Fighting  
Penalties, page 160). This penalty is cumulative with the penalty for 
one-handed firing. 
Crossbow,  Repeating:  The  repeating  crossbow  (whether  heavy  
or  light)  holds  5  crossbow  bolts.  As  long  as  it  holds  bolts,  you  can  
reload it by pulling the reloading lever (a free action). Loading a new 
case   of   5   bolts   is   a   full-round   action   that   provokes   attacks   of   
opportunity. 
You  can  fire  a  repeating  crossbow  with  one  hand  or  fire  a  repeat-
ing  crossbow  in  each  hand  in  the  same  manner  as  you  would  a  
normal  crossbow  of  the  same  size.  However,  you  must  fire  the  
weapon with two hands in order to use the reloading lever, and you 
must use two hands to load a new case of bolts. 
Dagger: The dagger is a common secondary weapon. You get a +2 
bonus on Sleight of Hand checks made to conceal a dagger on your 
body (see the Sleight of Hand skill, page 81). 
Dagger,   Punching:   This   dagger   puts   more   force   from   your   
punch behind it, making it capable of deadly strikes. 
Dart:  A  dart  is  the  size  of  a  large  arrow  and  has  a  weighted  head.  
Essentially, it is a small javelin. 
Table 7–5: Weapons 
Simple Weapons Cost Dmg (S) Dmg (M) Critical Range Increment Weight
1
           Type
2
 
Unarmed Attacks 
Gauntlet 2 gp 1d2 1d3 ×2 — 1 lb. Bludgeoning 
Unarmed strike — 1d2
3
                       1d33                       ×2                       —                       —                       Bludgeoning                       
Light Melee Weapons 
Dagger 2 gp 1d3 1d4 19–20/×2 10 ft. 1 lb. Piercing or slashing 
Dagger, punching 2 gp 1d3 1d4 ×3 — 1 lb. Piercing 
Gauntlet, spiked 5 gp 1d3 1d4 ×2 — 1 lb. Piercing 
Mace, light 5 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 — 4 lb. Bludgeoning 
Sickle 6 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 — 2 lb. Slashing 
One-Handed Melee Weapons 
Club — 1d4 1d6 ×2 10 ft. 3 lb. Bludgeoning 
Mace, heavy 12 gp 1d6 1d8 ×2 — 8 lb. Bludgeoning 
Morningstar 8 gp 1d6 1d8 ×2 — 6 lb. Bludgeoning and piercing 
Shortspear 1 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 20 ft. 3 lb. Piercing 
Two-Handed Melee Weapons 
Longspear
4
 5 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 — 9 lb. Piercing 
Quarterstaff
5
                                   —                                   1d4/1d4                                   1d6/1d6                                   ×2                                   —                                   4                                   lb.                                   Bludgeoning                                   
Spear 2 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 20 ft. 6 lb. Piercing 
Ranged Weapons 
Crossbow, heavy 50 gp 1d8 1d10 19–20/×2 120 ft. 8 lb. Piercing 
Bolts, crossbow (10) 1 gp — — — — 1 lb. — 
Crossbow, light 35 gp 1d6 1d8 19–20/×2 80 ft. 4 lb. Piercing 
Bolts, crossbow (10) 1 gp — — — — 1 lb. — 
Dart 5 sp 1d3 1d4 ×2 20 ft. 1/2 lb. Piercing 
Javelin 1 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 30 ft. 2 lb. Piercing 
Sling — 1d3 1d4 ×2 50 ft. 0 lb. Bludgeoning 
Bullets, sling (10) 1 sp — — — — 5 lb. — 
 
Martial Weapons Cost Dmg (S) Dmg (M) Critical Range Increment Weight
1
           Type
2
 
Light Melee Weapons 
Axe, throwing 8 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 10 ft. 2 lb. Slashing 
Hammer, light 1 gp 1d3 1d4 ×2 20 ft. 2 lb. Bludgeoning 
Handaxe 6 gp 1d4 1d6 ×3 — 3 lb. Slashing 
Kukri 8 gp 1d3 1d4 18–20/×2 — 2 lb. Slashing 
Pick, light 4 gp 1d3 1d4 ×4 — 3 lb. Piercing 
Sap 1 gp 1d43 1d63 ×2 — 2 lb. Bludgeoning 
Shield, light special 1d2 1d3 ×2 — special Bludgeoning 
Spiked armor special 1d4 1d6 ×2 — special Piercing 
Spiked shield, light special 1d3 1d4 ×2 — special Piercing 
Sword, short 10 gp 1d4 1d6 19–20/×2 — 2 lb. Piercing 
One-Handed Melee Weapons 
Battleaxe 10 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 — 6 lb. Slashing 
Flail 8 gp 1d6 1d8 ×2 — 5 lb. Bludgeoning 
Longsword 15 gp 1d6 1d8 19–20/×2 — 4 lb. Slashing 
Pick, heavy 8 gp 1d4 1d6 ×4 — 6 lb. Piercing 
Rapier 20 gp 1d4 1d6 18–20/×2 — 2 lb. Piercing 
Scimitar 15 gp 1d4 1d6 18–20/×2 — 4 lb. Slashing 
Shield, heavy special 1d3 1d4 ×2 — special Bludgeoning 
Spiked shield, heavy special 1d4 1d6 ×2 — special Piercing 
Trident 15 gp 1d6 1d8 ×2 10 ft. 4 lb. Piercing 
Warhammer 12 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 — 5 lb. Bludgeoning 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
117
Falchion: This sword, which is essentially a two-handed scimitar, 
has a curve that gives it the effect of a keener edge. 
Flail,  Dire:  A  dire  flail  is  a  double  weapon.  You  can  fight  with  it  
as  if  fighting  with  two  weapons,  but  if  you  do,  you  incur  all  the  
normal  attack  penalties  associated  with  fighting  with  two  weapons,  
just  as  if  you  were  using  a  one-handed  weapon  and  a  light  weapon  
(see  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  page  160).  A  creature  wielding  a  dire  
flail  in  one  hand  can’t  use  it  as  a  double  weapon—  only  one  end  of  
the weapon can be used in any given round. 
When using a dire flail, you get a +2 bonus on opposed attack rolls 
made to disarm an enemy (including the opposed attack roll to avoid 
being disarmed if such an attempt fails). 
You  can  also  use  this  weapon  to  make  trip  attacks.  If  you  are  
tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  dire  flail  to  
avoid being tripped. 
Flail or Heavy Flail: With a flail, you get a +2 bonus on opposed 
attack  rolls  made  to  disarm  an  enemy  (including  the  roll  to  avoid  
being disarmed if such an attempt fails). 
You  can  also  use  this  weapon  to  make  trip  attacks.  If  you  are  
tripped during your own trip attempt, you can drop the flail to avoid 
being tripped. 
Gauntlet: This metal glove protects your hands and lets you deal 
Two-Handed Melee Weapons 
Falchion 75 gp 1d6 2d4 18–20/×2 — 8 lb. Slashing 
Glaive
4
 8 gp 1d8 1d10 ×3 — 10 lb. Slashing 
Greataxe 20 gp 1d10 1d12 ×3 — 12 lb. Slashing 
Greatclub 5 gp 1d8 1d10 ×2 — 8 lb. Bludgeoning 
Flail, heavy 15 gp 1d8 1d10 19–20/×2 — 10 lb. Bludgeoning 
Greatsword 50 gp 1d10 2d6 19–20/×2 — 8 lb. Slashing 
Guisarme
4
 9 gp 1d6 2d4 ×3 — 12 lb. Slashing 
Halberd 10 gp 1d8 1d10 ×3 — 12 lb. Piercing or slashing 
Lance
4
 10 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 — 10 lb. Piercing 
Ranseur
4
 10 gp 1d6 2d4 ×3 — 12 lb. Piercing 
Scythe 18 gp 1d6 2d4 ×4 — 10 lb. Piercing or slashing 
Ranged Weapons 
Longbow 75 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 100 ft. 3 lb. Piercing 
Arrows (20) 1 gp — — — — 3 lb. — 
Longbow, composite 100 gp 1d6 1d8 ×3 110 ft. 3 lb. Piercing 
Arrows (20) 1 gp — — — — 3 lb. — 
Shortbow 30 gp 1d4 1d6 ×3 60 ft. 2 lb. Piercing 
Arrows (20) 1 gp — — — — 3 lb. — 
Shortbow, composite 75 gp 1d4 1d6 ×3 70 ft. 2 lb. Piercing 
Arrows (20) 1 gp — — — — 3 lb. — 
 
Exotic Weapons Cost Dmg (S) Dmg (M) Critical Range Increment Weight
1
           Type
2
 
Light Melee Weapons 
Kama 2 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 — 2 lb. Slashing 
Nunchaku 2 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 — 2 lb. Bludgeoning 
Sai 1 gp 1d3 1d4 ×2 10 ft. 1 lb. Bludgeoning 
Siangham 3 gp 1d4 1d6 ×2 — 1 lb. Piercing 
One-Handed Melee Weapons 
Sword, bastard 35 gp 1d8 1d10 19–20/×2 — 6 lb. Slashing 
Waraxe, dwarven 30 gp 1d8 1d10 ×3 — 8 lb. Slashing 
Whip
4
 1 gp 1d23 1d33 ×2  2 lb. Slashing 
Two-Handed Melee Weapons 
Axe, orc double
5
 60 gp 1d6/1d6 1d8/1d8 ×3 — 15 lb. Slashing 
Chain, spiked
4
 25 gp 1d6 2d4 ×2 — 10 lb. Piercing 
Flail, dire
5
 90 gp 1d6/1d6 1d8/1d8 ×2 — 10 lb. Bludgeoning 
Hammer, gnome hooked
5
 20 gp 1d6/1d4 1d8/1d6 ×3/×4 — 6 lb. Bludgeoning and piercing 
Sword, two-bladed
5
                     100                     gp                     1d6/1d6                     1d8/1d8                     19–20/×2                     —                     10                     lb.                     Slashing                     
Urgrosh, dwarven
5
 50 gp 1d6/1d4 1d8/1d6 ×3 — 12 lb. Slashing or piercing 
Ranged Weapons 
Bolas 5 gp 1d33 1d43 ×2 10 ft. 2 lb. Bludgeoning 
Crossbow, hand 100 gp 1d3 1d4 19–20/×2 30 ft. 2 lb. Piercing 
Bolts (10) 1 gp — — — — 1 lb. — 
Crossbow, repeating heavy 400 gp 1d8 1d10 19–20/×2 120 ft. 12 lb. Piercing 
Bolts (5) 1 gp — — — — 1 lb. —      
Crossbow, repeating light 250 gp 1d6 1d8 19–20/×2 80 ft. 6 lb. Piercing 
Bolts (5) 1 gp — — — — 1 lb. —      
Net 20 gp — — — 10 ft. 6 lb. —      
Shuriken (5) 1 gp 1 1d2 ×2 10 ft. 1/2 lb. Piercing 
1 Weight figures are for Medium weapons. A Small weapon weighs half as much, and a Large weapon weighs twice as much. 
2 When two types are given, the weapon is both types if the entry specifies “and,” or either type (player’s choice at time of attack) if the entry specifies 
“or.” 
3 The weapon deals nonlethal damage rather than lethal damage. 
4 Reach weapon. 
5 Double weapon. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
118 
lethal  damage  rather  than  nonlethal  damage  with  unarmed  strikes.  
A strike with a gauntlet is otherwise considered an unarmed attack. 
The  cost  and  weight  given  are  for  a  single  gauntlet.  Medium  and  
heavy armors (except breastplate) come with gauntlets. 
Gauntlet,  Spiked:  Your  opponent  cannot  use  a  disarm  action  to  
disarm  you  of  spiked  gauntlets.  The  cost  and  weight  given  are  for  a  
single  gauntlet.  An  attack  with  a  spiked  gauntlet  is  considered  an  
armed attack. 
Glaive: A glaive has reach. You can strike opponents 10 feet away 
with it, but you can’t use it against an adjacent foe. 
Greataxe:  This  big,  heavy  axe  is  a  favorite  of  barbarians  and  any-
body else who wants the capability to deal out incredible damage. 
Greatclub: A greatclub is a two-handed version of a regular club. 
It is often studded with nails or spikes or ringed by bands of iron. 
Greatsword: Adventurers recognize the greatsword as one of the 
best melee weapons available. It’s reliable and powerful. 
Guisarme:  A  guisarme  has  reach.  You  can  strike  opponents  10  
feet away with it, but you can’t use it against an adjacent foe. 
Because  of  a  guisarme’s  curved  blade,  you  can  also  use  it  to  make  
trip attacks. If you are tripped during your own trip attempt, you can 
drop the guisarme to avoid being tripped. 
Halberd:  Normally,  you  strike  with  a  halberd’s  axe  head,  but  the  
spike  on  the  end  is  useful  against  charging  opponents.  If  you  use  a  
ready  action  to  set  a  halberd  against  a  charge,  you  deal  double  
damage on a successful hit against a charging character. 
You  can  use  the  hook  on  the  back  of  a  halberd  to  make  trip  
attacks.  If  you  are  tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  
drop the halberd to avoid being tripped. 
Hammer,   Gnome   Hooked:   A   gnome   hooked   hammer   is   a   
double   weapon.   You   can   fight   with   it   as   if   fighting   with   two   
weapons,  but  if  you  do,  you  incur  all  the  normal  attack  penalties  
associated with fighting with two weapons, just as if you were using 
a   one-handed   weapon   and   a   light   weapon   (see   Two-Weapon   
Fighting,  page  160).  The  hammer’s  blunt  head  is  a  bludgeoning  
weapon  that  deals  1d6  points  of  damage  (crit  ×3).  Its  hook  is  a  
piercing  weapon  that  deals  1d4  points  of  damage  (crit  ×4).  You  can  
use  either  head  as  the  primary  weapon.  The  other  head  is  the  
offhand  weapon.  A  creature  wielding  a  gnome  hooked  hammer  in  
one  hand  can’t  use  it  as  a  double  weapon—only  one  end  of  the  
weapon can be used in any given round. 
You can use a gnome hooked hammer to make trip attacks. If you 
are  tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  gnome  
hooked hammer to avoid being tripped. 
Gnomes treat gnome hooked hammers as martial weapons. 
Hammer,  Light:  This  is  a  small  sledge  light  enough  to  throw.  It  
is favored by dwarves. 
Handaxe: Dwarves favor these axes as off-hand weapons. 
Javelin:   This   weapon   is   a   light,   flexible   spear   intended   for   
throwing.  You  can  use  it  in  melee,  but  not  well.  Since  it  is  not  
designed for melee, you are treated as nonproficient with it and take 
a –4 penalty on attack rolls if you use a javelin as a melee weapon. 
Kama:  The  kama  is  a  special  monk  weapon.  This  designation  
gives  a  monk  (see  Chapter  3:  Classes)  wielding  a  kama  special  
options. 
Because  of  a  kama’s  shape,  you  can  use  it  to  make  trip  attacks.  If  
you  are  tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  
kama to avoid being tripped. 
Kukri:  This  heavy,  curved  knife  has  its  sharp  edge  on  the  inside  
of the curve. 
Lance: A lance deals double damage when used from the back of 
a  charging  mount.  It  has  reach,  so  you  can  strike  opponents  10  feet  
away with it, but you can’t use it against an adjacent foe. 
While mounted, you can wield a lance with one hand. 
Longbow: You need at least two hands to use a bow, regardless of 
Illus. by L. Grant-West 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
119
its size. A longbow is too unwieldy to use while you are mounted. If 
you  have  a  penalty  for  low  Strength,  apply  it  to  damage  rolls  when  
you  use  a  longbow.  If  you  have  a  bonus  for  high  Strength,  you  can  
apply  it  to  damage  rolls  when  you  use  a  composite  longbow  (see  
below) but not a regular longbow. 
Longbow, Composite: You need at least two hands to use a bow, 
regardless   of   its   size.   You   can   use   a   composite   longbow   while   
mounted. Composite bows are made from laminated horn, wood, or 
bone  and  built  with  a  recurve,  meaning  that  the  bow  remains  bow-
shaped  even  when  unstrung.  All  composite  bows  are  made  with  a  
particular   strength   rating   (that   is,   each   requires   a   minimum   
Strength modifier to use with proficiency). If your Strength bonus is 
less   than   the   strength   rating   of   the   composite   bow,   you   can’t   
effectively  use  it,  so  you  take  a  –2  penalty  on  attacks  with  it.  The  
default  composite  longbow  requires  a  Strength  modifier  of  +0  or  
higher  to  use  with  proficiency.  A  composite  longbow  can  be  made  
with a high strength rating (representing an especially heavy pull) to 
take   advantage   of   an   above-average   Strength   score;   this   feature   
allows   you   to   add   your   Strength   bonus   to   damage,   up   to   the   
maximum  bonus  indicated  for  the  bow.  Each  point  of  Strength  
bonus  granted  by  the  bow  adds  100  gp  to  its  cost.  For  instance,  a  
composite  longbow  (+1  Str  bonus)  costs  200  gp,  while  a  composite  
longbow (+4 Str bonus) costs 500 gp. 
For  example,  Tordek  has  a  +2  Strength  bonus.  With  a  regular  
composite  longbow,  he  gets  no  modifier  on  damage  rolls.  For  200  
gp, he can buy a composite longbow (+1 Str bonus), which lets him 
add +1 to his damage rolls. For 300 gp, he can buy one that lets him 
add  his  entire  +2  Strength  bonus.  Even  if  he  paid  400  gp  for  a  
composite  longbow  (+3  Str  bonus),  he  would  still  get  only  a  +2  bo-
nus on damage rolls and takes a –2 penalty on attacks with it because 
his Strength is insufficient to use the weapon to best advantage. The 
bow can’t grant him a higher bonus than he already has. 
For purposes of weapon proficiency and similar feats, a composite 
longbow is treated as if it were a longbow. Thus, if you have Weapon 
Focus  (longbow),  that  feat  applies  both  to  longbows  and  composite  
longbows. 
Longspear:  A  longspear  has  reach.  You  can  strike  opponents  10  
feet  away  with  it,  but  you  can’t  use  it  against  an  adjacent  foe.  If  you  
use a ready action to set a longspear against a charge, you deal double 
damage on a successful hit against a charging character. 
Longsword:   This   classic,   straight   blade   is   the   weapon   of   
knighthood and valor. It is a favorite weapon of many paladins. 
Mace,  Heavy  or  Light:  A  mace  is  made  of  metal,  even  the  haft,  
which makes it quite heavy and very hard to break. 
Net:  A  fighting  net  has  small  barbs  in  the  weave  and  a  trailing  
rope to control netted opponents. You use it to entangle enemies. 
When  you  throw  a  net,  you  make  a  ranged  touch  attack  against  
your target. A net’s maximum range is 10 feet. If you hit, the target is 
entangled.  An  entangled  creature  takes  a  –2  penalty  on  attack  rolls  
and  a  –4  penalty  on  Dexterity,  can  move  at  only  half  speed,  and  
cannot charge or run. If you control the trailing rope by succeeding 
on  an  opposed  Strength  check  while  holding  it,  the  entangled  
creature can move only within the limits that the rope allows. If the 
entangled  creature  attempts  to  cast  a  spell,  it  must  make  a  DC  15  
Concentration check or be unable to cast the spell. 
An  entangled  creature  can  escape  with  a  DC  20  Escape  Artist  
check (a full-round action). The net has 5 hit points and can be burst 
with a DC 25 Strength check (also a full-round action). 
A  net  is  useful  only  against  creatures  within  one  size  category  of  
you.  For  instance,  a  Small  character  wielding  a  net  can  entangle  
Tiny, Small, or Medium creatures. 
A  net  must  be  folded  to  be  thrown  effectively.  The  first  time  you  
throw  your  net  in  a  fight,  you  make  a  normal  ranged  touch  attack  
Illus. by L. Grant-West 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
120 
roll.  After  the  net  is  unfolded,  you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  attack  rolls  
with it. It takes 2 rounds for a proficient user to fold a net and twice 
that long for a nonproficient one to do so. 
Nunchaku:  The  nunchaku  is  a  special  monk  weapon.  This  des-
ignation gives a monk wielding a nunchaku special options. With a 
nunchaku,  you  get  a  +2  bonus  on  opposed  attack  rolls  made  to  
disarm an enemy (including the roll to avoid being disarmed if such 
an attempt fails). 
Pick, Heavy or Light: A pick is designed to concentrate the force 
of its blow on a small area. A light or heavy pick resembles a miner’s 
pick but is specifically designed for war. 
Quarterstaff:  The  quarterstaff  is  the  favorite  weapon  of  many  
characters,   from   travelers,   peasants,   and   merchants   to   monks,   
rangers,  and  wizards.  A  quarterstaff  is  a  double  weapon.  You  can  
fight with it as if fighting with two weapons, but if you do, you incur 
all  the  normal  attack  penalties  associated  with  fighting  with  two  
weapons, just as if you were using a one-handed weapon and a light 
weapon  (see  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  page  160).  You  can  also  strike  
with either end singly, a fact that allows you to take full advantage of 
openings   in   your   opponent’s   defenses.   A   creature   wielding   a   
quarterstaff  in  one  hand  can’t  use  it  as  a  double  weapon—only  one  
end of the weapon can be used in any given round. 
The quarterstaff is a special monk weapon. This designation gives 
a  monk  (see  Chapter  3:  Classes)  wielding  a  quarterstaff  special  
options. 
Ranseur:  A  ranseur  has  reach.  You  can  strike  opponents  10  feet  
away with it, but you can’t use it against an adjacent foe. 
With  a  ranseur,  you  get  a  +2  bonus  on  opposed  attack  rolls  made  
to disarm an opponent (including the roll to avoid being disarmed if 
such an attempt fails). 
Rapier:  You  can  use  the  Weapon  Finesse  feat  page  102)  to  apply  
your  Dexterity  modifier  instead  of  your  Strength  modifier  to  attack  
rolls  with  a  rapier  sized  for  you,  even  though  it  isn’t  a  light  weapon  
for you. You can’t wield a rapier in two hands in order to apply 1-1/2 
times your Strength bonus to damage. 
Sai:  A  sai’s  pronglike  extrusions  are  designed  to  help  catch  and  
disarm  opponent’s  weapons.  With  a  sai,  you  get  a  +4  bonus  on  
opposed attack rolls made to disarm an enemy (including the roll to 
avoid being disarmed if such an attempt fails). 
The  sai  is  a  special  monk  weapon.  This  designation  gives  a  monk  
(see Chapter 3: Classes) wielding a sai special options. 
Sap: A sap comes in handy when you want to knock an opponent 
out instead of killing it. 
Scimitar:  The  curve  on  this  blade  gives  it  the  effect  of  a  keener  
edge. 
Scythe:  While  it  resembles  the  standard  farm  implement  of  the  
same  name,  this  scythe  is  balanced  and  strengthened  for  war.  The  
design of the scythe focuses tremendous force on the sharp point, as 
well as allowing devastating slashes with the blade edge. 
Because of a scythe’s shape, you can use it to make trip attacks. If 
you  are  tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  
scythe to avoid being tripped. 
Shield,  Heavy  or  Light:  You  can  bash  with  a  shield  instead  of  
using it for defense. See Armor, later in this chapter. 
Shortbow: You need at least two hands to use a bow, regardless of 
its  size.  You  can  use  a  shortbow  while  mounted.  If  you  have  a  
penalty  for  low  Strength,  apply  it  to  damage  rolls  when  you  use  a  
shortbow. If you have a bonus for high Strength, you can apply it to 
damage  rolls  when  you  use  a  composite  shortbow  (see  below)  but  
not a regular shortbow. 
Shortbow, Composite: You need at least two hands to use a bow, 
regardless  of  its  size.  You  can  use  a  composite  shortbow  while  
mounted. Composite bows are made from laminated horn, wood, or 
bone  and  built  with  a  recurve,  meaning  that  the  bow  remains  bow-
shaped  even  when  unstrung.  All  composite  bows  are  made  with  a  
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
121
particular   strength   rating   (that   is,   each   requires   a   minimum   
Strength modifier to use with proficiency). If your Strength bonus is 
lower  than  the  strength  rating  of  the  composite  bow,  you  can’t  
effectively  use  it,  so  you  take  a  –2  penalty  on  attacks  with  it.  The  
default  composite  shortbow  requires  a  Strength  modifier  of  +0  or  
higher  to  use  with  proficiency.  A  composite  shortbow  can  be  made  
with  a  high  strength  rating  to  take  advantage  of  an  above-average  
Strength score; this feature allows you to add your Strength bonus to 
damage,  up  to  the  maximum  bonus  indicated  for  the  bow.  Each  
point  of  Strength  bonus  granted  by  the  bow  adds  75  gp  to  its  cost.    
For  instance,  a  composite  shortbow  (+1  Str  bonus)  costs  150  gp,  
while a composite shortbow (+4 Str bonus) costs 375 gp. 
For  example,  Tordek  has  a  +2  Strength  bonus.  With  a  regular  
composite  shortbow,  he  gets  no  modifier  on  damage  rolls.  For  150  
gp, he can buy a composite shortbow (+1 Str bonus), which lets him 
add +1 to his damage rolls. For 225 gp, he can buy one that lets him 
add  his  entire  +2  Strength  bonus.  Even  if  he  paid  300  gp  for  a  
composite  shortbow  (+3  Str  bonus),  he  would  still  get  only  a  +2  
bonus  on  damage  rolls  and  takes  a  –2  penalty  on  attacks  with  it  
because   his   Strength   is   insufficient   to   use   the   weapon   to   best   
advantage.  The  bow  can’t  grant  him  a  higher  bonus  than  he  already  
has. 
For purposes of weapon proficiency and similar feats, a composite 
shortbow  is  treated  as  if  it  were  a  shortbow.  Thus,  if  you  have  
Weapon  Focus  (shortbow),  that  feat  applies  both  to  short-bows  and  
composite shortbows. 
Shortspear: A shortspear is small enough to wield one-handed. It 
may also be thrown. 
Shuriken:  A  shuriken  is  a  special  monk  weapon.  This  designa-
tion gives a monk (see Chapter 3: Classes) wielding shuriken special 
options. A shuriken can’t be used as a melee weapon. 
Although   they   are   thrown   weapons,   shuriken   are   treated   as   
ammunition for the purposes of drawing them, crafting masterwork 
or  otherwise  special  versions  of  them  (see  Masterwork  Weapons,  
below), and what happens to them after they are thrown. 
Siangham:  The  siangham  is  a  special  monk  weapon.  This  des-
ignation  gives  a  monk  (see  Chapter  3:  Classes)  wielding  a  siangham  
special options. 
Sickle: This weapon is like a farmer’s sickle, but it is strengthened 
for use as a weapon. It is favored by druids and by anyone who wants 
a weapon that might be overlooked by guards. 
Because of a sickle’s shape, you can also use it to make trip attacks. 
If  you  are  tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  
sickle to avoid being tripped. 
Sling: A sling hurls lead bullets. It doesn’t shoot as far as a cross-
bow, nor is it as powerful as a bow, but it’s cheap and easy to 
improvise   from   common   materials.   Druids   and   halflings   favor   
slings. Your Strength modifier applies to damage rolls when you use 
a sling, just as it does for thrown weapons. You can fire, but not load, 
a sling with one hand. Loading a sling is a move action that requires 
two hands and provokes attacks of opportunity. 
You  can  hurl  ordinary  stones  with  a  sling,  but  stones  are  not  as  
dense or as round as bullets. Thus, such an attack deals damage as if 
the  weapon  were  designed  for  a  creature  one  size  category  smaller  
than you (for instance, 1d3 instead of 1d4, or 1d2 instead of 1d3) and 
you take a –1 penalty on attack rolls. 
Spear:  One  of  the  simplest  weapons  in  existence,  the  spear  is  
favored by druids and sorcerers. It can be thrown. If you use a ready 
action  to  set  a  spear  against  a  charge,  you  deal  double  damage  on  a  
successful hit against a charging character. 
Spiked Armor: You can outfit your armor with spikes, which can 
deal  damage  in  a  grapple  or  as  a  separate  attack.  See  Armor,  later  in  
this chapter. 
Spiked  Shield,  Heavy  or  Light:  You  can  bash  with  a  spiked  
shield  instead  of  using  it  for  defense.  See  Armor,  later  in  this  
chapter. 
Strike,   Unarmed:   A   Medium   character   deals   1d3   points   of   
nonlethal  damage  with  an  unarmed  strike,  which  may  be  a  punch,  
kick,  head  butt,  or  other  type  of  attack.  A  Small  character  deals  1d2  
points  of  nonlethal  damage.  A  monk  or  any  character  with  the  
Improved  Unarmed  Strike  feat  can  deal  lethal  or  nonlethal  damage  
with  unarmed  strikes,  at  her  option.  The  damage  from  an  unarmed  
strike  is  considered  weapon  damage  for  the  purposes  of  effects  that  
give you a bonus on weapon damage rolls. 
An  unarmed  strike  is  always  considered  a  light  weapon.  There-
fore,  you  can  use  the  Weapon  Finesse  feat  (page  102)  to  apply  your  
Dexterity  modifier  instead  of  your  Strength  modifier  to  attack  rolls  
with an unarmed strike. 
Sword,  Bastard:  bastard  swords  are  also  known  as  hand-and-a-
half swords. A bastard sword is too large to use in one hand without 
special  training;  thus,  it  is  an  exotic  weapon.  A  character  can  use  a  
bastard sword two-handed as a martial weapon. 
Sword, Short: This sword is popular as an off-hand weapon. 
Sword,  Two-Bladed:  A  two-bladed  sword  is  a  double  weapon.  
You can fight with it as if fighting with two weapons, but if you do, 
you  incur  all  the  normal  attack  penalties  associated  with  fighting  
with  two  weapons,  just  as  if  you  were  using  a  one-handed  weapon  
and a light weapon (see Two-Weapon Fighting, page 160). A creature 
wielding  a  two-bladed  sword  in  one  hand  can’t  use  it  as  a  double  
weapon—only  one  end  of  the  weapon  can  be  used  in  any  given  
round. 
Trident: This three-tined piercing weapon can be thrown just as a 
shortspear   or   spear   can   be,   but   its   range   increment   is   shorter   
because it’s not as aerodynamic as those other weapons. If you use a 
ready action to set a trident against a charge, you deal double damage 
on a successful hit against a charging character. 
Urgrosh, Dwarven: A dwarven urgrosh is a double weapon. You 
can fight with it as if fighting with two weapons, but if you do, you 
incur  all  the  normal  attack  penalties  associated  with  fighting  with  
two  weapons,  just  as  if  you  were  using  a  one-handed  weapon  and  a  
light  weapon  (see  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  page  160).  The  urgrosh’s  
axe  head  is  a  slashing  weapon  that  deals  1d8  points  of  damage.  Its  
spear head is a piercing weapon that deals 1d6 points of damage. You 
can use either head as the primary weapon. The other is the off-hand 
weapon.  A  creature  wielding  a  dwarven  urgrosh  in  one  hand  can’t  
use it as a double weapon—only one end of the weapon can be used 
in any given round. 
If  you  use  a  ready  action  to  set  an  urgrosh  against  a  charge,  you  
deal double damage if you score a hit against a charging character. If 
you  use  an  urgrosh  against  a  charging  character,  the  spear  head  is  
the part of the weapon that deals damage. 
An  urgrosh  is  also  called  a  spear-axe.  Dwarves  treat  dwarven  
urgroshes as martial weapons. 
Waraxe,  Dwarven:  A  dwarven  waraxe  is  too  large  to  use  in  one  
hand   without   special   training;   thus,   it   is   an   exotic   weapon.   A   
Medium   character   can   use   a   dwarven   waraxe   two-handed   as   a   
martial  weapon,  or  a  Large  creature  can  use  it  one-handed  in  the  
same way. A dwarf treats a dwarven waraxe as a martial weapon even 
when using it in one hand. 
Warhammer:  This  weapon,  favored  by  dwarves,  is  a  one-handed  
sledge or maul with a large, heavy head. 
Whip: A whip deals nonlethal damage. It deals no damage to any 
creature  with  an  armor  bonus  of  +1  or  higher  or  a  natural  armor  
bonus  of  +3  or  higher.  The  whip  is  treated  as  a  melee  weapon  with  
15-foot reach, though you don’t threaten the area into which you can 
make an attack. In addition, unlike most other weapons with reach, 
you  can  use  it  against  foes  anywhere  within  your  reach  (including  
adjacent foes). 
Using a whip provokes an attack of opportunity, just as if you had 
used a ranged weapon. 
Because  a  whip  can  wrap  around  an  enemy’s  leg  or  other  limb,  
you  can  make  trip  attacks  with  a  it.  If  you  are  tripped  during  your  
own trip attempt, you can drop the whip to avoid being tripped. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
122 
When  using  a  whip,  you  get  a  +2  bonus  on  opposed  attack  rolls  
made to disarm an opponent (including the roll to keep from being 
disarmed if the attack fails). 
You  can  use  the  Weapon  Finesse  feat  (page  102)  to  apply  your  
Dexterity  modifier  instead  of  your  Strength  modifier  to  attack  rolls  
with  a  whip  sized  for  you,  even  though  it  isn’t  a  light  weapon  for  
you. 
 
MASTERWORK WEAPONS 
A   masterwork   weapon   is   a   finely   crafted   version   of   a   normal   
weapon.  Wielding  it  provides  a  +1  enhancement  bonus  on  attack  
rolls. 
You  can’t  add  the  masterwork  quality  to  a  weapon  after  it  is  cre-
ated;  it  must  be  crafted  as  a  masterwork  weapon  (see  the  Craft  skill,  
page 70). The masterwork quality adds 300 gp to the cost of a normal 
weapon  (or  6  gp  to  the  cost  of  a  single  unit  of  ammunition,  such  as  
an  arrow).  For  example,  a  masterwork  bastard  sword  costs  335  gp,  
while   a   set   of   10   masterwork   arrows   costs   70   gp.   Adding   the   
masterwork  quality  to  a  double  weapon  costs  twice  the  normal  
increase (+600 gp). 
Masterwork   ammunition   is   damaged   (effectively   destroyed)   
when  used.  The  enhancement  bonus  of  masterwork  ammunition  
does   not   stack   with   any   enhancement   bonus   of   the   projectile   
weapon firing it. 
All   magic   weapons   are   automatically   considered   to   be   of   
masterwork   quality.   The   enhancement   bonus   granted   by   the   
masterwork   quality   doesn’t   stack   with   the   enhancement   bonus   
provided by the weapon’s magic. 
Even  though  some  types  of  armor  and  shields  (such  as  spiked  
shields)  can  be  used  as  weapons,  you  can’t  create  a  masterwork  ver-
sion  of  such  an  item  that  confers  an  enhancement  bonus  on  attack  
rolls.  Instead,  masterwork  armor  and  shields  have  lessened  armor  
check penalties (see Masterwork Armor, page 126). 
 
ARMOR 
Your  armor  protects  you  in  combat,  but  it  can  also  slow  you  down.  
See  Table  7–6:  Armor  and  Shields  for  the  list  of  armors  available.  
The  information  given  on  this  table  is  for  armor  sized  for  Medium  
creatures. The time it takes to get into or out of armor depends on its 
type (see Table 7–7: Donning Armor). 
 
ARMOR QUALITIES 
Armor isn’t the only fashion statement a character can make, but it’s 
a  big  one.  In  addition,  depending  on  class,  a  character  may  be  
proficient  with  all,  some,  or  no  armors,  including  shields.  To  wear  
heavier armor effectively, you can select the Armor Proficiency feats 
(page 89), but most classes are automatically proficient in the armors 
that work best for them. 
Armor  and  shields  can  take  damage  from  some  types  of  attacks  
(see Sunder, page 158, and Smashing an Object, page 165). 
When  selecting  your  character’s  armor,  keep  in  mind  the  fol-
lowing  factors  (given  as  column  headings  on  Table  7–6:  Armor  and  
Shields). 
Cost:  The  cost  of  the  armor  for  Small  or  Medium  humanoid  
creatures.  See  the  Armor  for  Unusual  Creatures  sidebar  for  armor  
prices for other creatures. 
Armor/Shield Bonus: Each armor grants an armor bonus to AC, 
while  shields  grant  a  shield  bonus  to  AC.  The  armor  bonus  from  a  
suit  of  armor  doesn’t  stack  with  other  effects  or  items  that  grant  an  
armor  bonus,  such  as  the  mage  armor  spell  or  bracers  of  armor.. 
Similarly,  the  shield  bonus  from  a  shield  doesn’t  stack  with  other  
effects that grant a shield bonus, such as the shield spell. 
Maximum  Dex  Bonus: This number is the maximum Dexterity 
bonus  to  AC  that  this  type  of  armor  allows.  Heavier  armors  limit  
your  mobility,  reducing  your  ability  to  dodge  blows.  For  example,  
chainmail  permits  a  maximum  Dexterity  bonus  of  +2.  A  character  
with a Dexterity score of 18 normally gains a +4 bonus to his AC, but 
wearing  chainmail  drops  that  bonus  to  +2.  Such  a  character’s  final  
Armor Class would be 17 (10 base + 5 armor bonus + 2 Dex bonus = 
17),  assuming  he  has  no  other  modifiers.  This  restriction  doesn’t  
affect  any  other  Dexterity-related  abilities  (such  as  Reflex  saves  and  
skill checks). 
Even  if  a  character’s  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  drops  to  0  because  of  
armor,  this  situation  does  not  count  as  losing  a  Dexterity  bonus  to  
AC. For example, a rogue can’t sneak attack a character just because 
you’re wearing half-plate. 
Your  character’s  encumbrance  (the  amount  of  gear  he  or  she  
carries)  may  also  restrict  the  maximum  Dexterity  bonus  that  can  be  
applied to his or her Armor Class; see Encumbrance by Armor, page 
161, for details. 
Shields:  Shields  do  not  affect  a  character’s  maximum  Dexterity  
bonus. 
Armor  Check  Penalty:  Anything  heavier  than  leather  hurts  a  
character’s   ability   to   use   some   skills.   An   armor   check   penalty   
number  is  the  penalty  that  applies  to  Balance,  Climb,  Escape  Artist,  
Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Sleight of Hand, and Tumble checks by 
a  character  wearing  a  certain  kind  of  armor.  Double  the  normal  
armor  check  penalty  is  applied  to  Swim  checks.  Some  characters  
don’t  much  care  about  the  armor  check  penalty,  but  others  do.  The  
barbarian,  in  particular,  faces  a  trade-off  between  heavier  armor  and  
better skill check results. A character’s encumbrance (the amount of 
gear   carried,   including   armor)   may   also   apply   an   armor   check   
penalty; see Encumbrance by Armor, page 161, for details. 
Shields:  If  a  character  is  wearing  armor  and  using  a  shield,  both  
armor check penalties apply. 
Nonproficient  with  Armor  Worn:  A  character  who  wears  armor  
and/or uses a shield with which he or she is not proficient takes the 
armor’s (and/or shields’s) armor check penalty on attack rolls and on 
all  Strength-based  and  Dexterity-based  ability  and  skill  checks.  The  
penalty  for  nonproficiency  with  armor  stacks  with  the  penalty  for  
nonprofiency with shields. 
Sleeping  in  Armor:  A  character  who  sleeps  in  medium  or  heavy  
armor  is  automatically  fatigued  the  next  day.  He  or  she  takes  a  –2  
penalty on Strength and Dexterity and can’t charge or run. Sleeping 
in light armor does not cause fatigue. 
Arcane  Spell  Failure:  Armor  interferes  with  the  gestures  that  a  
spellcaster  must  make  to  cast  an  arcane  spell  that  has  a  somatic  
component.  Arcane  spellcasters  face  the  possibility  of  arcane  spell  
failure  if  they’re  wearing  armor,  so  wizards  and  sorcerers  usually  
don’t do so. Bards can wear light armor without incurring any arcane 
spell failure chance for their bard spells. 
Casting  an  Arcane  Spell  in  Armor:  A  character  who  casts  an  arcane  
spell while wearing armor must usually make an arcane spell failure 
roll. The number in the Arcane Spell Failure column on Table 7–6 is 
the  chance  that  the  spell  fails  and  is  ruined.  If  the  spell  lacks  a  
somatic  component,  however,  it  can  be  cast  with  no  chance  of  
arcane spell failure. 
Shields: If a character is wearing armor and using a shield, add the 
two numbers together to get a single arcane spell failure chance. 
Speed:  Medium  and  heavy  armor  slows  the  wearer  down.  It’s  
better  to  be  slow  and  alive  than  to  be  quick  and  dead,  but  don’t  
neglect to give speed some thought. The number on Table 7–6 is the 
character’s  speed  while  wearing  the  armor.  Humans,  elves,  half-
elves,  and  half-orcs  have  an  unencumbered  speed  of  30  feet.  They  
use   the   first   column.   Dwarves,   gnomes,   and   halflings   have   an   
unencumbered   speed   of   20   feet.   They   use   the   second   column.   
Remember, however, that a dwarf’s land speed remains 20 feet even 
in  medium  or  heavy  armor  or  when  carrying  a  medium  or  heavy  
load. 
Shields: Shields do not affect a character’s speed. 
Weight:  This  column  gives  the  weight  of  the  armor  sized  for  a  
Medium  wearer.  Armor  fitted  for  Small  characters  weighs  half  as  
much, and armor for Large characters weighs twice as much. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
123
GETTING INTO AND OUT OF ARMOR 
The  time  required  to  don  armor  depends  on  its  type;  see  Table  7–7:  
Donning Armor. 
Don: This column on Table 7–7 tells how long it takes a character 
to put the armor on. (One minute is 10 rounds.) Readying (strapping 
on) a shield is only a move action. 
Don  Hastily:  This  column  tells  how  long  it  takes  to  put  the  
armor  on  in  a  hurry.  The  armor  check  penalty  and  armor  bonus  for  
hastily  donned  armor  are  each  1  point  worse  than  normal.  For  
example, if Tordek donned his scale mail hastily, it would take him 1 
minute (10 rounds), the armor would provide only a +3 bonus to his 
AC  (instead  of  +4),  and  his  armor  check  penalty  would  be  –5  
(instead of –4). 
Remove: This column tells how long it takes to get the armor off 
(important   to   know   if   you   are   suddenly   submerged;   see   the   
drowning  rules  in  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide).  Loosing  a  shield  
(removing it from the arm and dropping it) is only a move action. 
 
Table 7–7: Donning Armor 
Armor Type Don Don Hastily Remove 
Shield (any) 1 move action n/a 1 move action 
Padded,  1 minute 5 rounds 1 minute
1
 
leather, hide, 
studded leather, 
or chain shirt 
Breastplate,                     4                     minutes
1
 1 minute 1 minute
1
 
scale mail, 
chainmail, 
banded mail, 
or splint mail 
Half-plate                        4                        minutes
2
         4         minutes
1
     1d4+1     minutes
1
 
or full plate 
1 If the character has some help, cut this time in half. A single character 
doing nothing else can help one or two adjacent characters. Two 
characters can’t help each other don armor at the same time. 
2 The wearer must have help to don this armor. Without help, it can be 
donned only hastily.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7–6: Armor and Shields 
  Armor/Shield Maximum Armor Arcane Spell —–— Speed ——– 
Armor Cost Bonus Dex Bonus Check Penalty Failure Chance (30 ft.) (20 ft.) Weight
1
 
Light armor 
Padded 5 gp +1 +8 0 5% 30 ft. 20 ft. 10 lb. 
Leather 10 gp +2 +6 0 10% 30 ft. 20 ft. 15 lb. 
Studded leather 25 gp +3 +5 –1 15% 30 ft. 20 ft. 20 lb. 
Chain shirt 100 gp +4 +4 –2 20% 30 ft. 20 ft. 25 lb. 
Medium armor 
Hide 15 gp +3 +4 –3 20% 20 ft. 15 ft. 25 lb. 
Scale mail 50 gp +4 +3 –4 25% 20 ft. 15 ft. 30 lb. 
Chainmail 150 gp +5 +2 –5 30% 20 ft. 15 ft. 40 lb. 
Breastplate 200 gp +5 +3 –4 25% 20 ft. 15 ft. 30 lb. 
Heavy armor 
Splint mail 200 gp +6 +0 –7 40% 20 ft.
2
             15             ft.
2
             45             lb.             
Banded mail 250 gp +6 +1 –6 35% 20 ft.
2
             15             ft.
2
             35             lb.             
Half-plate                               600                               gp                               +7                               +0                               –7                               40%                               20                               ft.
2
             15             ft.
2
             50             lb.             
Full plate 1,500 gp +8 +1 –6 35% 20 ft.
2
             15             ft.
2
             50             lb.             
Shields 
Buckler 15 gp +1 — –1 5% — — 5 lb. 
Shield, light wooden 3 gp +1 — –1 5% — — 5 lb. 
Shield, light steel 9 gp +1 — –1 5% — — 6 lb. 
Shield, heavy wooden 7 gp +2 — –2 15% — — 10 lb. 
Shield, heavy steel 20 gp +2 — –2 15% — — 15 lb. 
Shield, tower 30 gp +4
3
                      +2                      –10                         50%                      —                      —                      45                      lb.                      
Extras 
Armor spikes +50 gp — — — — — — +10 lb. 
Gauntlet, locked 8 gp — — Special 
4
                        —                        —                        +5                        lb.                        
Shield                            spikes                            +10                            gp                            —                            —                            —                            —                            —                            —                            +5                            lb.                            
1 Weight figures are for armor sized to fit Medium characters. Armor fitted for Small characters weighs half as much, and armor fitted for Large 
characters weighs twice as much. 
2 When running in heavy armor, you move only triple your speed, not quadruple. 
3 A tower shield can instead grant you cover. See the description. 
4 Hand not free to cast spells. 
ARMOR FOR UNUSUAL CREATURES 
Armor and shields for unusually big creatures, unusually little creatures,
and nonhumanoid creatures have different costs and weights from those
given on Table 7–6: Armor and Shields. Refer to the appropriate line on
the  table  below  and  apply  the  multipliers  to  cost  and  weight  for  the
armor type in question. 
 
  Humanoid Nonhumanoid 
Size                          Cost                          Weight                          Cost                          Weight 
Tiny or smaller
1
      ×1/2         ×1/10      ×1      ×1/10      
Small                         ×1                         ×1/2                         ×2                         ×1/2                         
Medium                    ×1                    ×1                       ×2                    ×1                    
Large                         ×2                         ×2                         ×4                         ×2                         
Huge                         ×4                         ×5                         ×8                         ×5                         
Gargantuan              ×8              ×8              ×16                 ×8              
Colossal                   ×16                   ×12                     ×32                   ×12                   
1 Divide armor bonus by 2. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
124 
ARMOR DESCRIPTIONS 
The  types  of  armor  found  on  Table  7–6:  Armor  and  Shields  are  
described   below   (in   alphabetical   order),   along   with   any   special   
benefits they confer on the wearer (“you”). 
Armor  Spikes:  You  can  have  spikes  added  to  your  armor,  which  
allow you to deal extra piercing damage (see Table 7–5: Weapons) on 
a successful grapple attack. The spikes count as a martial weapon. If 
you  are  not  proficient  with  them,  you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  grapple  
checks when you try to use them. You can also make a regular melee 
attack (or off-hand attack) with the spikes, and they count as a light 
weapon  in  this  case.  (You  can’t  also  make  an  attack  with  armor  
spikes  if  you  have  already  made  an  attack  with  another  off-hand  
weapon, and vice versa.) 
An  enhancement  bonus  to  a  suit  of  armor  does  not  improve  the  
spikes’ effectiveness, but the spikes can be made into magic weapons 
in their own right. 
Banded  Mail:  This  armor  is  made  of  overlapping  strips  of  metal  
sewn   to   a   backing   of   leather   and   chainmail.   The   strips   cover   
vulnerable  areas,  while  the  chain  and  leather  protect  the  joints  and  
provide  freedom  of  movement.  Straps  and  buckles  distribute  the  
weight evenly. The suit includes gauntlets. 
Breastplate:  A  breastplate  covers  your  front  and  your  back.  It  
comes with a helmet and greaves (plates to cover your lower legs). A 
light suit or skirt of studded leather beneath the breastplate protects 
your limbs without restricting movement much. 
Buckler:  This  small  metal  shield  is  worn  strapped  to  your  fore-
arm. You can use a bow or crossbow without penalty while carrying 
it. You can also use your shield arm to wield a weapon (whether you 
are using an off-hand weapon or using your off hand to help wield a 
two-handed weapon), but you take a –1 penalty on attack rolls while 
doing  so  because  of  the  extra  weight  on  your  arm.  This  penalty  
stacks with those that may apply for fighting with your off hand and 
for  fighting  with  two  weapons.  In  any  case,  if  you  use  a  weapon  in  
your  off  hand,  you  don’t  get  the  buckler’s  AC  bonus  for  the  rest  of  
the round. 
You can’t bash someone with a buckler. 
Chain Shirt: A chain shirt protects your torso while leaving your 
limbs  free  and  mobile.  It  includes  a  layer  of  quilted  fabric  worn  
underneath  to  prevent  chafing  and  to  cushion  the  impact  of  blows.  
A chain shirt comes with a steel cap. 
Chainmail:  This  armor  is  made  of  interlocking  metal  rings.  It  
includes  a  layer  of  quilted  fabric  worn  underneath  to  prevent  chaf-
ing  and  to  cushion  the  impact  of  blows.  Several  layers  of  mail  are  
hung  over  vital  areas.  Most  of  the  armor’s  weight  hangs  from  the  
shoulders,   making   chainmail   uncomfortable   to   wear   for   long   
periods of time. The suit includes gauntlets. 
Full  Plate:  This  armor  consists  of  shaped  and  fitted  metal  plates  
riveted  and  interlocked  to  cover  the  entire  body.  The  suit  includes  
gauntlets, heavy leather boots, a visored helmet, and a thick layer of 
padding  that  is  worn  underneath  the  armor.  Buckles  and  straps  
distribute the weight over the body, so full plate hampers movement 
less  than  splint  mail  even  though  splint  is  lighter.  Each  suit  of  full  
plate   must   be   individually   fitted   to   its   owner   by   a   master   
armorsmith,  although  a  captured  suit  can  be  resized  to  fit  a  new  
owner at a cost of 200 to 800 (2d4 × 100) gold pieces. 
Full plate is also known as field plate. 
Gauntlet,  Locked:  This  armored  gauntlet  has  small  chains  and  
braces  that  allow  the  wearer  to  attach  a  weapon  to  the  gauntlet  so  
that it cannot be dropped easily. It provides a +10 bonus on any roll 
made  to  keep  from  being  disarmed  in  combat.  Removing  a  weapon  
from a locked gauntlet or attaching a weapon to a locked gauntlet is 
a  full-round  action  that  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity.  The  price  
given is for a single locked gauntlet. The weight given applies only if 
you’re  wearing  a  breastplate,  light  armor,  or  no  armor.  Otherwise,  
the  locked  gauntlet  replaces  a  gauntlet  you  already  have  as  part  of  
the armor. 
While the gauntlet is locked, you can’t use the hand wearing it for 
casting  spells  or  employing  skills.  (You  can  still  cast  spells  with  
somatic components, provided that your other hand is free.) 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
125
Like  a  normal  gauntlet,  a  locked  gauntlet  lets  you  deal  lethal  
damage rather than nonlethal damage with an unarmed strike. 
Half-Plate: This armor is a combination of chainmail with metal 
plates  (breastplate,  epaulettes,  elbow  guards,  gauntlets,  tasses,  and  
greaves) covering vital areas. Buckles and straps hold the whole suit 
together  and  distribute  the  weight,  but  the  armor  still  hangs  more  
loosely than full plate. The suit includes gauntlets. 
Hide:  This  armor  is  prepared  from  multiple  layers  of  leather  and  
animal  hides.  It  is  stiff  and  hard  to  move  in.  Druids,  who  wear  only  
nonmetallic armor, favor hide. 
Leather:  The  breastplate  and  shoulder  protectors  of  this  armor  
are made of leather that has been stiffened by boiling in oil. The rest 
of the armor is made of softer and more flexible leather. 
Padded:  Padded  armor  features  quilted  layers  of  cloth  and  bat-
ting. It gets hot quickly and can become foul with sweat, grime, lice, 
and fleas. 
Scale  Mail:  This  armor  consists  of  a  coat  and  leggings  (and  per-
haps  a  separate  skirt)  of  leather  covered  with  overlapping  pieces  of  
metal, much like the scales of a fish. The suit includes gauntlets. 
Shield,  Heavy,  Wooden  or  Steel:  You  strap  a  shield  to  your  
forearm  and  grip  it  with  your  hand.  A  heavy  shield  is  so  heavy  that  
you can’t use your shield hand for anything else. 
Wooden  or  Steel:  Wooden  and  steel  shields  offer  the  same  basic  
protection,  though  they  respond  differently  to  special  attacks  (such  
as warp wood and heat metal). 
Shield Bash Attacks: You can bash an opponent with a heavy shield, 
using  it  as  an  off-hand  weapon.  See  Table  7–5:  Weapons  for  the  
damage dealt by a shield bash. Used this way, a heavy shield is a mar-
tial  bludgeoning  weapon.  For  the  purpose  of  penalties  on  attack  
rolls,  treat  a  heavy  shield  as  a  one-handed  weapon.  If  you  use  your  
shield  as  a  weapon,  you  lose  its  AC  bonus  until  your  next  action  
(usually  until  the  next  round).  An  enhancement  bonus  on  a  shield  
does not improve the effectiveness of a shield bash made with it, but 
the shield can be made into a magic weapon in its own right. 
Shield,  Light,  Wooden  or  Steel:  You  strap  a  shield  to  your  
forearm  and  grip  it  with  your  hand.  A  light  shield’s  weight  lets  you  
carry  other  items  in  that  hand,  although  you  cannot  use  weapons  
with it. 
Wooden  or  Steel:  Wooden  and  steel  shields  offer  the  same  basic  
protection,  though  they  respond  differently  to  special  attacks  (such  
as warp wood and heat metal). 
Shield  Bash  Attacks: You can bash an opponent with a light shield, 
using  it  as  an  off-hand  weapon.  See  Table  7–5:  Weapons  for  the  
damage  dealt  by  a  shield  bash.  Used  this  way,  a  light  shield  is  a  
martial bludgeoning weapon. For the purpose of penalties on attack 
rolls, treat a light shield as a light weapon. If you use your shield as a 
weapon,  you  lose  its  AC  bonus  until  your  next  action  (usually  until  
the  next  round).  An  enhancement  bonus  on  a  shield  does  not  
improve  the  effectiveness  of  a  shield  bash  made  with  it,  but  the  
shield can be made into a magic weapon in its own right. 
Shield, Tower: This massive wooden shield is nearly as tall as you 
are. In most situations, it provides the indicated shield bonus to your 
AC. However, you can instead use it as total cover, though you must 
give up your attacks to do so. The shield does not, however, provide 
cover  against  targeted  spells;  a  spellcaster  can  cast  a  spell  on  you  by  
targeting  the  shield  you  are  holding.  You  cannot  bash  with  a  tower  
shield, nor can you use your shield hand for anything else. 
When employing a tower shield in combat, you take a –2 penalty 
on attack rolls because of the shield’s encumbrance. 
Shield  Spikes:  When  added  to  your  shield,  these  spikes  turn  it  
into  a  martial  piercing  weapon  that  increases  the  damage  dealt  by  a  
shield  bash  as  if  the  shield  were  designed  for  a  creature  one  size  
category  larger  than  you  (from  1d4  to  1d6,  for  instance).  You  can’t  
put spikes on a buckler or a tower shield. Otherwise, attacking with 
a  spiked  shield  is  like  making  a  shield  bash  attack  (see  above).  An  
enhancement   bonus   on   a   spiked   shield   does   not   improve   the   
effectiveness of a shield bash made with it, but a spiked shield can be 
made into a magic weapon in its own right. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
126 
Splint Mail: This armor is made of narrow vertical strips of metal 
riveted to a backing of leather that is worn over cloth padding. Flex-
ible chainmail protects the joints. The suit includes gauntlets. 
Studded  Leather:  This  armor  is  made  from  tough  but  flexible  
leather  (not  hardened  leather  as  with  normal  leather  armor)  rein-
forced with close-set metal rivets. 
 
MASTERWORK ARMOR 
Just as with weapons, you can purchase or craft masterwork versions 
of armor or shields. Such a well-made item functions like the normal 
version,  except  that  its  armor  check  penalty  is  lessened  by  1.  For  
example, a masterwork chain shirt has an armor check penalty of –1 
rather than –2. 
A  masterwork  suit  of  armor  or  shield  costs  an  extra  150  gp  over  
and  above  the  normal  cost  for  that  type  of  armor  or  shield.  A  mas-
terwork chain shirt would thus cost 250 gp. 
The masterwork quality of a suit of armor or shield never provides 
a bonus on attack or damage rolls, even if the armor or shield is used 
as a weapon (such as spiked armor or a spiked shield). 
All  magic  armors  and  shields  are  automatically  considered  to  be  
of masterwork quality. 
You  can’t  add  the  masterwork  quality  to  armor  or  a  shield  after  it  
is created; it must be crafted as a masterwork item. 
 
GOODS AND SERVICES 
Of course, characters need more than just weapons and armor. Table 
7–8:  Goods  and  Services  provides  costs  and  weights  for  dozens  of  
other  items,  and  costs  for  a  variety  of  services  that  characters  can  
purchase. 
 
ADVENTURING GEAR 
Adventurers  face  all  sorts  of  challenges  and  difficulties,  and  the  
right  gear  can  make  the  different  between  a  successful  adventure  
and failure. Most of this gear is basic equipment that might come in 
handy regardless of a character’s skills or class. 
A  few  of  the  pieces  of  adventuring  gear  found  on  Table  7–8:  
Goods  and  Services  (page  128)  are  described  below,  along  with  any  
special  benefits  they  confer  on  the  user  (“you”).  For  objects  with  
hardness and hit points, see Smashing an Object, page 165. 
Backpack:  A  backpack  is  a  leather  pack  carried  on  the  back,  
typically with straps to secure it. 
Bedroll:  You  never  know  where  you’re  going  to  sleep,  and  a  
bedroll helps you get better sleep in a hayloft or on the cold ground. 
A bedroll consists of bedding and a blanket thin enough to be rolled 
up and tied. In an emergency, it can double as a stretcher. 
Blanket,  Winter:  A  thick,  quilted,  wool  blanket  made  to  keep  
you warm in cold weather. 
Caltrops:  A  caltrop  is  a  four-pronged  iron  spike  crafted  so  that  
one  prong  faces  up  no  matter  how  the  caltrop  comes  to  rest.  You  
scatter caltrops on the ground in the hope that your enemies step on 
them  or  are  at  least  forced  to  slow  down  to  avoid  them.  One  2-  
pound bag of caltrops covers an area 5 feet square. 
Each  time  a  creature  moves  into  an  area  covered  by  caltrops  (or  
spends  a  round  fighting  while  standing  in  such  an  area),  it  might  
step on one. The caltrops make an attack roll (base attack bonus +0) 
against the creature. For this attack, the creature’s shield, armor, and 
deflection  bonuses  do  not  count.  (Deflection  averts  blows  as  they  
approach,   but   it   does   not   prevent   a   creature   from   touching   
something  dangerous.)  If  the  creature  is  wearing  shoes  or  other  
footwear,  it  gets  a  +2  armor  bonus  to  AC.  If  the  caltrops  succeed  on  
the attack, the creature has stepped on one. The caltrop deals 1 point 
of  damage,  and  the  creature’s  speed  is  reduced  by  one-half  because  
its  foot  is  wounded.  This  movement  penalty  lasts  for  24  hours,  or  
until the creature is successfully treated with a DC 15 Heal check, or 
until  it  receives  at  least  1  point  of  magical  curing.  A  charging  or  
running creature must immediately stop if it steps on a caltrop. Any 
creature  moving  at  half  speed  or  slower  can  pick  its  way  through  a  
bed of caltrops with no trouble. 
The  DM  judges  the  effectiveness  of  caltrops  against  unusual  
opponents.  A  Small  monstrous  centipede,  for  example,  can  slither  
through an area containing caltrops with no chance of hurting itself, 
and  a  fire  giant  wearing  fire  giant-sized  boots  is  immune  to  normal-
size caltrops. (They just get stuck in the soles of his boots.) 
Candle: A candle dimly illuminates a 5-foot radius and burns for 
1 hour. See page 164 for more rules on illumination. 
Case, Map or Scroll: This capped leather or tin rube holds rolled 
pieces of parchment or paper. 
Chain:  Chain  has  hardness  10  and  5  hit  points.  It  can  be  burst  
with a DC 26 Strength check. 
Crowbar: This iron bar is made for levering closed items open. A 
crowbar  is  the  perfect  tool  for  prying  open  doors  or  chests,  shat-
tering chains, and the like, and it grants a +2 circumstance bonus on 
Strength  checks  made  for  such  purposes.  If  used  in  combat,  treat  a  
crowbar  as  a  one-handed  improvised  weapon  (see  page  113)  that  
deals bludgeoning damage equal to that of a club of its size. 
Flask: This ceramic, glass, or metal container is fitted with a tight 
stopper and holds 1 pint of liquid. 
Flint  and  Steel:  Striking  steel  and  flint  together  creates  sparks.  
By   knocking   sparks   into   tinder,   you   can   create   a   small   flame.   
Lighting  a  torch  with  flint  and  steel  is  a  full-round  action,  and  
lighting any other fire with them takes at least that long. 
Grappling  Hook:  When  tied  to  the  end  of  a  rope,  a  grappling  
hook  can  secure  the  rope  to  a  battlement,  window  ledge,  tree  limb,  
or  other  protrusion.  Throwing  a  grappling  hook  successfully  requi-
res a Use Rope check (DC 10, +2 per 10 feet of distance thrown). 
Hammer:  This  one-handed  hammer  with  an  iron  head  is  useful  
for pounding pitons into a wall. If a hammer is used in combat, treat 
it  as  a  one-handed  improvised  weapon  (see  page  113)  that  deals  
bludgeoning damage equal to that of a spiked gauntlet of its size. 
Ink: This is black ink. You can buy ink in other colors, but it costs 
twice as much. 
Inkpen:  An  inkpen  is  a  wooden  stick  with  a  special  tip  on  the  
end.  The  tip  draws  ink  in  when  dipped  in  a  vial  and  leaves  an  ink  
trail when drawn across a surface. 
Jug, Clay: This basic ceramic jug is fitted with a stopper and holds 
1 gallon of liquid. 
Ladder, 10-foot: This item is a straight, simple wooden ladder. 
Lamp,  Common:  A  lamp  clearly  illuminates  a  15-foot  radius,  
provides shadowy illumination out to a 30-foot radius, and burns for 
6  hours  on  a  pint  of  oil.  It  burns  with  a  more  even  flame  than  a  
torch,  but,  unlike  a  lantern,  it  uses  an  open  flame  and  it  can  spill  
easily,  a  fact  that  makes  it  too  dangerous  for  most  adventuring.  You  
can  carry  a  lamp  in  one  hand.    See  page  164  for  more  rules  on  
illumination. 
Lantern,  Bullseye:  A  bullseye  lantern  has  only  a  single  shutter.  
Its  other  sides  are  highly  polished  inside  to  reflect  the  light  in  a  
single  direction.  A  bullseye  lantern  provides  clear  illumination  in  a  
60-foot  cone  and  shadowy  illumination  in  a  120-foot  cone.  It  burns  
for  6  hours  on  a  pint  of  oil.  You  can  carry  a  bullseye  lantern  in  one  
hand. See page 164 for more rules on illumination. 
Lantern,  Hooded:  A  hooded  lantern  has  shuttered  or  hinged  
sides.  It  clearly  illuminates  a  30-foot  radius  and  provides  shadowy  
illumination in a 60-foot radius. It burns for 6 hours on a pint of oil. 
You  can  carry  a  hooded  lantern  in  one  hand.  See  page  164  for  more  
rules on illumination. 
Lock: A lock is worded with a large, bulky key. The DC to open a 
lock with the Open Lock skill depends on the lock’s quality: simple 
(DC 20), average (DC 25), good (DC 30), or superior (DC 40). 
Manacles  and  Manacles,  Masterwork:  The  manacles  detailed  
on  Table  7–8:  Goods  and  Services  can  bind  a  Medium  creature.  A  
manacled creature can use the Escape Artist skill to slip free (DC 30, 
or DC 35 for masterwork manacles). Breaking the manacles requires 
a  Strength  check  (DC  26,  or  DC  28  for  masterwork  manacles).  
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
127
Manacles  have  hardness  10  and  10  hit  points.  Most  manacles  have  
locks; add the cost of the lock you want to the cost of the manacles. 
For the same cost, you can buy manacles for a Small creature. For 
a Large creature, manacles cost ten times the indicated amount, and 
for  a  Huge  creature,  one  hundred  times  this  amount.  Gargantuan,  
Colossal,  Tiny,  Diminutive,  and  Fine  creatures  can  be  held  only  by  
specially made manacles. 
Mirror,  Small  Steel:  A  polished  steel  mirror  is  handy  when  you  
want  to  look  around  corners,  signal  friends  with  reflected  sunlight,  
keep  an  eye  on  a  medusa,  make  sure  that  you  look  good  enough  to  
present   yourself   to   the   queen,   or   examine   wounds   that   you’ve   
received on hard-to-see parts of your body. 
Oil:  A  pint  of  oil  burns  for  6  hours  in  a  lantern.  You  can  use  a  
flask of oil as a splash weapon (see Throw Splash Weapon, page 158). 
Use  the  rules  for  alchemist’s  fire,  except  that  it  takes  a  full-round  
action to prepare a flask with a fuse. Once it is thrown, there is a 50% 
chance of the flask igniting successfully. 
You  can  pour  a  pint  of  oil  on  the  ground  to  cover  an  area  5  feet  
square, provided that the surface is smooth. If lit, the oil burns for 2 
rounds  and  deals  1d3  points  of  fire  damage  to  each  creature  in  the  
area. 
Paper: A sheet of standard paper is made from cloth fibers. 
Parchment:  A  sheet  of  parchment  is  a  piece  of  goat  hide  or  
sheepskin that has been prepared for writing on. 
Piton:  When  a  wall  doesn’t  offer  handholds  and  footholds,  you  
can  make  your  own.  A  piton  is  a  steel  spike  with  an  eye  through  
which you can loop a rope. (See the Climb skill, page 69). 
Pole,  10-foot:  When  you  suspect  a  trap,  you  can  put  the  end  of  
your  10-foot  pole  through  that  hole  in  the  wall  instead  of  reaching  
in with your hand. 
Pouch,  Belt:  This  leather  pouch  straps  to  your  belt.  It’s  good  for  
holding small items. 
Ram,  Portable:  This  iron-shod  wooden  beam  is  the  perfect  tool  
for   battering   down   a   door.   Not   only   does   it   gives   you   a   +2   
circumstance  bonus  on  Strength  checks  made  to  break  open  a  door  
and  it  allows  a  second  person  to  help  you  without  having  to  roll,  
increasing your bonus by 2 (see Breaking Items, page 167). 
Rations,  Trail:  Trail  rations  are  compact,  dry,  high-energy  foods  
suitable for travel, such as jerky, dried fruit, hardtack, and nuts. 
Rope, Hempen: This rope has 2 hit points and can be burst with 
a DC 23 Strength check. 
Rope, Silk: This rope has 4 hit points and can be burst with a DC 
24 Strength check. It is so supple that it provides a +2 circumstance 
bonus on Use Rope checks. 
Sack:  This  item  is  made  of  burlap  or  a  similar  material  and  has  a  
drawstring so it can be closed. 
Signet Ring: Each signet ring has a distinctive design carved into 
it.  When  you  press  this  ring  into  warm  sealing  wax,  you  leave  an  
identifying mark. 
Sledge:   This   two-handed,   iron-headed   hammer   is   good   for   
smashing open treasure chests. 
Spyglass:  Objects  viewed  through  a  spyglass  are  magnified  to  
twice their size. 
Tent: This simple tent sleeps two. 
Torch: A typical torch is a wooden rod capped with a twisted flax 
soaked in tallow. A torch burns for 1 hour, clearly illuminating a 20-
foot  radius  and  providing  shadowy  illumination  out  to  a  40-  foot  
radius. See page 164 for more rules on illumination. If a torch is used 
in  combat,  treat  it  as  a  one-handed  improvised  weapon  (see  page  
113) that deals bludgeoning damage equal to that of a gauntlet of its 
size, plus 1 point of fire damage. 
Vial: This ceramic, glass, or metal vial is fitted with a tight stopper 
and  holds  1  ounce  of  liquid.  The  stoppered  container  usually  is  no  
more than 1 inch wide and 3 inches high. 
Waterskin:  A  waterskin  is  a  leather  pouch  with  a  narrow  neck  
that is used for holding water. 
 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
128 
SPECIAL SUBSTANCES AND ITEMS 
These  special  substances  are  prized  by  adventurers.  Any  of  them  
except  for  the  everburning  torch  and  holy  water  can  be  made  by  a  
character with the Craft (alchemy) skill (page 70). 
Acid: You can throw a flask of acid as a splash weapon (see Throw 
Splash Weapon, page 158). Treat this attack as a ranged touch attack 
with  a  range  increment  of  10  feet.  A  direct  hit  deals  1d6  points  of  
acid  damage.  Every  creature  within  5  feet  of  the  point  where  the  
acid hits takes 1 point of acid damage from the splash. 
Alchemist’s  Fire:  Alchemist’s  fire  is  sticky,  adhesive  substance  
that ignites when exposed to air. You can throw a flask of alchemist’s 
fire as a splash weapon (see Throw Splash Weapon, page 158). Treat 
this  attack  as  a  ranged  touch  attack  with  a  range  increment  of  10  
feet. 
A direct hit deals 1d6 points of fire damage. Every creature within 
5  feet  of  the  point  where  the  flask  hits  takes  1  point  of  fire  damage  
from the splash. On the round following a direct hit, the target takes 
an  additional  1d6  points  of  damage.  If  desired,  the  target  can  use  a  
full-round  action  to  attempt  to  extinguish  the  flames  before  taking  
this  additional  damage.  Extinguishing  the  flames  requires  a  DC  15  
Reflex save. Rolling on the ground provides the target a +2 bonus on 
the  save.  Leaping  into  a  lake  or  magically  extinguishing  the  flames  
automatically smothers the fire. 
Antitoxin: If you drink antitoxin, you get a +5 alchemical bonus 
on Fortitude saving throws against poison for 1 hour. 
Everburning Torch: This otherwise normal torch has a continual 
flame  spell  cast  upon  it.  An  everburning  torch  clearly  illuminates  a  
20-foot  radius  and  provides  shadowy  illumination  out  to  a  40-foot  
radius. See page 164 for more rules on illumination. 
Holy  Water:  Holy  water  damages  undead  creatures  and  evil  
outsiders  almost  as  if  it  were  acid.  A  flask  of  holy  water  can  be  
thrown  as  a  splash  weapon  (see  Throw  Splash  Weapon,  page  158).  
Treat this attack as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 
10  feet.  A  flask  breaks  if  thrown  against  the  body  of  a  corporeal  
creature, but to use it against an incorporeal creature, you must open 
the flask and pour the holy water out onto the target. Thus, you can 
douse   an   incorporeal   creature   with   holy   water   only   if   you   are   
adjacent  to  it.  Doing  so  is  a  ranged  touch  attack  that  does  not  
provoke attacks of opportunity. 
A direct hit by a flask of holy water deals 2d4 points of damage to 
an undead creature or an evil outsider. Each such creature within 5 
feet  of  the  point  where  the  flask  hits  takes  1  point  of  damage  from  
the splash. 
Temples to good deities sell holy water at cost (making no profit) 
because the clerics are happy to supply people with what they need 
to battle evil. 
Smokestick:  This  alchemically  treated  wooden  stick  instantly  
creates thick, opaque smoke when ignited. The smoke fills a 10- foot 
cube  (treat  the  effect  as  a  fog  cloud  spell,  except  that  a  moderate  or  
stronger   wind   dissipates   the   smoke   in   1   round).   The   stick   is   
consumed after 1 round, and the smoke dissipates naturally. 
Sunrod:  This  1-foot-long,  gold-tipped,  iron  rod  glows  brightly  
when  struck.  It  clearly  illuminates  a  30-foot  radius  and  provides  
shadowy  illumination  in  a  60-foot  radius.  It  glows  for  6  hours,  after  
which  the  gold  tip  is  burned  out  and  worthless.  See  pages  164  for  
more rules on illumination. 
Tanglefoot Bag: This round leather bag is full of alchemical goo. 
When  you  throw  a  tanglefoot  bag  at  a  creature  (as  a  ranged  touch  
Table 7–8: Goods and Services 
 
Adventuring Gear 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Backpack (empty) 2 gp 2 lb.
1
 
Barrel (empty) 2 gp 30 lb. 
Basket (empty) 4 sp 1 lb. 
Bedroll 1 sp 5 lb.
 1
 
Bell                                  1                                  gp                                  —                                  
Blanket, winter 5 sp 3 lb.
 1
 
Block and tackle 5 gp 5 lb. 
Bottle, wine, glass 2 gp — 
Bucket (empty) 5 sp 2 lb. 
Caltrops 1 gp 2 lb. 
Candle                             1                             cp                             —                             
Canvas (sq. yd.) 1 sp 1 lb. 
Case, map or scroll 1 gp 1/2 lb. 
Chain (10 ft.) 30 gp 2 lb. 
Chalk, 1 piece 1 cp — 
Chest (empty) 2 gp 25 lb. 
Crowbar 2 gp 5 lb. 
Firewood (per day) 1 cp 20 lb. 
Fishhook                         1                         sp                         —                         
Fishing net, 25 sq. ft. 4 gp 5 lb. 
Flask (empty) 3 cp 1-1/2 lb. 
Flint and steel 1 gp — 
Grappling hook 1 gp 4 lb. 
Hammer 5 sp 2 lb. 
Ink (1 oz. vial) 8 gp — 
Inkpen                             1                             sp                             —                             
Jug, clay 3 cp 9 lb. 
Ladder, 10-foot 5 cp 20 lb. 
Lamp, common 1 sp 1 lb. 
Lantern, bullseye 12 gp 3 lb. 
Lantern, hooded 7 gp 2 lb. 
Lock   1 lb. 
Very simple 20 gp 1 lb. 
 
Average 40 gp 1 lb. 
Good 80 gp 1 lb. 
Amazing                     150                     gp                     1                     lb.                     
Manacles 15 gp 2 lb. 
Manacles, masterwork   50 gp 2 lb. 
Mirror, small steel 10 gp 1/2 lb. 
Mug/Tankard, clay 2 cp 1 lb. 
Oil (1-pint flask) 1 sp 1 lb. 
Paper (sheet) 4 sp — 
Parchment (sheet) 2 sp — 
Pick, miner’s 3 gp 10 lb. 
Pitcher, clay 2 cp 5 lb. 
Piton 1 sp 1/2 lb. 
Pole, 10-foot 2 sp 8 lb. 
Pot, iron 5 sp 10 lb. 
Pouch, belt (empty) 1 gp 1/2 lb.
1
 
Ram, portable 10 gp 20 lb. 
Rations, trail (per day)   5 sp 1 lb.
 1
 
Rope, hempen (50 ft.)    1 gp 10 lb. 
Rope, silk (50 ft.) 10 gp 5 lb. 
Sack (empty) 1 sp 1/2 lb.
 1
 
Sealing wax 1 gp 1 lb. 
Sewing needle 5 sp — 
Signal whistle 8 sp — 
Signet ring 5 gp — 
Sledge 1 gp 10 lb. 
Soap (per lb.) 5 sp 1 lb. 
Spade or shovel 2 gp 8 lb. 
Spyglass 1,000 gp 1 lb. 
Tent 10 gp 20 lb.
 1
 
Torch 1 cp 1 lb. 
Vial, ink or potion 1 gp 1/10 lb. 
Waterskin 1 gp 4 lb.
 1
 
Whetstone 2 cp 1 lb. 
 
Special Substances and Items 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Acid (flask) 10 gp 1 lb. 
Alchemist’s fire (flask)   20 gp 1 lb. 
Antitoxin (vial) 50 gp — 
Everburning torch 110 gp 1 lb. 
Holy water (flask) 25 gp 1 lb. 
Smokestick 20 gp 1/2 lb. 
Sunrod 2 gp 1 lb. 
Tanglefoot bag 50 gp 4 lb. 
Thunderstone 30 gp 1 lb. 
Tindertwig                       1                       gp                         —                       
 
Tools and Skill Kits 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Alchemist’s lab 500 gp 40 lb. 
Artisan’s tools 5 gp 5 lb. 
Artisan’s tools, 55 gp 5 lb. 
masterwork 
Climber’s kit 80 gp 5 lb.
1
 
Disguise kit 50 gp 8 lb.
1
 
Healer’s kit 50 gp 1 lb. 
Holly and mistletoe — — 
Holy symbol, wooden    1 gp — 
Holy symbol, silver 25 gp 1 lb. 
Hourglass 25 gp 1 lb. 
Magnifying glass 100 gp — 
Musical instrument, 5 gp 3 lb.
1
 
common 
Musical instrument, 100 gp 3 lb.
1
 
masterwork 
Scale, merchant’s 2 gp 1 lb. 
Spell component 5 gp 2 lb. 
pouch 
Spellbook, wizard’s 15 gp 3 lb. 
(blank) 
Thieves’ tools 30 gp 1 lb. 
 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
129
attack  with  a  range  increment  of  10  feet),  the  bag  comes  apart  and  
the  goo  bursts  out,  entangling  the  target  and  then  becoming  tough  
and resilient upon exposure to air. An entangled creature takes a –2 
penalty on attack rolls and a –4 penalty to Dexterity and must make 
a  DC  15  Reflex  save  or  be  glued  to  the  floor,  unable  to  move.  Even  
on  a  successful  save,  it  can  move  only  at  half  speed.  Huge  or  larger  
creatures are unaffected by a tanglefoot bag. A flying creature is not 
stuck to the floor, but it must make a DC 15 Reflex save or be unable 
to  fly  (assuming  it  uses  its  wings  to  fly)  and  fall  to  the  ground.  A  
tanglefoot bag does not function underwater. 
A  creature  that  is  glued  to  the  floor  (or  unable  to  fly)  can  break  
free  by  making  a  DC  17  Strength  check  or  by  dealing  15  points  of  
damage  to  the  goo  with  a  slashing  weapon.  A  creature  trying  to  
scrape  goo  off  itself,  or  another  creature  assisting,  does  not  need  to  
make  an  attack  roll;  hitting  the  goo  is  automatic,  after  which  the  
creature  that  hit  makes  a  damage  roll  to  see  how  much  of  the  goo  
was scraped off. Once free, the creature can move (including flying) 
at  half  speed.  A  character  capable  of  spellcasting  who  is  bound  by  
the goo must make a DC 15 Concentration check to cast a spell. The 
goo becomes brittle and fragile after 2d4 rounds, cracking apart and 
losing  its  effectiveness.  An  application  of  universal  solvent  (see  page  
268  of  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide)  to  a  stuck  creature  dissolves  the  
alchemical goo immediately. 
Thunderstone: You can throw this stone as a ranged attack with 
a  range  increment  of  20  feet.  When  it  strikes  a  hard  surface  (or  is  
struck  hard),  it  creates  a  deafening  bang  that  is  treated  as  a  sonic  
attack. Each creature within a 10-foot-radius spread must make a DC 
15 Fortitude save or be deafened for 1 hour. A deafened creature, in 
addition  to  the  obvious  effects,  takes  a  –4  penalty  on  initiative  and  
has   a   20%   chance   to   miscast   and   lose   any   spell   with   a   verbal   
component that it tries to cast. 
Since you don’t need to hit a specific target, you can simply aim at 
a particular 5-foot square. Treat the target square as AC 5; if you miss, 
see   Throw   Splash   Weapon,   page   158,   to   determine   where   the   
thunderstone lands. 
Tindertwig:  The  alchemical  substance  on  the  end  of  this  small,  
wooden stick ignites when struck against a rough surface. Creating a 
flame  with  a  tindertwig  is  much  faster  than  creating  a  flame  with  
flint  and  steel  (or  a  magnifying  glass)  and  tinder.  Lighting  a  torch  
with  a  tindertwig  is  a  standard  action  (rather  than  a  full-round  
action),  and  lighting  any  other  fire  with  one  is  at  least  a  standard  
action. 
 
TOOLS AND SKILL KITS 
This equipment is particularly useful if you have certain skills or are 
of a certain class. 
Alchemist’s Lab: This set of equipment includes beakers, bottles, 
mixing  and  measuring  containers,  and  a  miscellany  of  chemicals  
and  substances.  An  alchemist’s  lab  always  has  the  perfect  tool  for  
making alchemical items, so it provides a +2 circumstance bonus on 
Craft (alchemy) checks. It has no bearing on the costs related to the 
Craft (alchemy) skill (page 70). Without this lab, a character with the 
Craft (alchemy) skill is assumed to have enough tools to use the skill 
but not enough to get the +2 bonus that the lab provides. 
Artisan’s  Tools:  These  special  tools  include  the  items  needed  to  
pursue any craft. Without them, you have to use improvised tools (–
2 penalty on Craft checks), if you can do the job at all. 
Artisan’s  Tools,  Masterwork:  These  tools  serve  the  same  pur-
pose  as  artisan’s  tools  (above),  but  masterwork  artisan’s  tools  are  the  
Thieves’ tools, 100 gp 2 lb. 
masterwork 
Tool, masterwork 50 gp 1 lb. 
Water clock 1,000 gp 200 lb. 
 
Clothing 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Artisan’s outfit 1 gp 4 lb.
1
 
Cleric’s vestments 5 gp 6 lb.
 1
 
Cold weather outfit 8 gp 7 lb.
 1
 
Courtier’s outfit 30 gp 6 lb.
 1
 
Entertainer’s outfit 3 gp 4 lb.
 1
 
Explorer’s outfit 10 gp 8 lb.
 1
 
Monk’s outfit 5 gp 2 lb.
 1
 
Noble’s outfit 75 gp 10 lb.
 1
 
Peasant’s outfit 1 sp 2 lb.
 1
 
Royal outfit 200 gp 15 lb.
 1
 
Scholar’s outfit 5 gp 6 lb.
 1
 
Traveler’s outfit 1 gp 5 lb.
 1
 
 
Food, Drink, and Lodging 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Ale                                                                                                          
Gallon 2 sp 8 lb. 
Mug 4 cp 1 lb. 
Banquet (per person)     10 gp — 
Bread, per loaf 2 cp 1/2 lb. 
Cheese, hunk of 1 sp 1/2 lb. 
Inn stay (per day)   
Good                           2                           gp                           —                           
Common                    5                    sp                    —                    
Poor                            2                            sp                            —                            
Meals (per day)   
Good                           5                           sp                           —                           
Common                    3                    sp                    —                    
Poor                            1                            sp                            —                            
Meat, chunk of 3 sp 1/2 lb. 
 
Wine 
Common (pitcher)     2 sp 6 lb. 
Fine (bottle) 10 gp 1-1/2 lb. 
 
Mounts and Related Gear 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Barding                                                                                 
Medium creature ×2 ×1 
Large creature ×4 ×2 
Bit and bridle 2 gp 1 lb. 
Dog, guard 25 gp — 
Dog, riding 150 gp — 
Donkey or mule 8 gp — 
Feed (per day) 5 cp 10 lb. 
Horse                                                                                          
Horse, heavy 200 gp — 
Horse, light 75 gp — 
Pony                            30                            gp                            —                            
Warhorse, heavy 400 gp — 
Warhorse, light 150 gp — 
Warpony                     100                     gp                     —                     
Saddle                                                                                       
Military 20 gp 30 lb. 
Pack 5 gp 15 lb. 
Riding 10 gp 25 lb. 
Saddle, Exotic   
Military 60 gp 40 lb. 
Pack 15 gp 20 lb. 
Riding 30 gp 30 lb. 
Saddlebags 4 gp 8 lb. 
Stabling (per day) 5 sp — 
 
Transport 
Item                                 Cost                                 Weight                                 
Carriage                           100                           gp                           600                           lb.                           
Cart 15 gp 200 lb. 
Galley                              30,000                              gp                              —                              
 
Keelboat                          3,000                          gp                          —                          
Longship                         10,000                         gp                         —                         
Rowboat 50 gp 100 lb. 
Oar 2 gp 10 lb. 
Sailing ship 10,000 gp — 
Sled 20 gp 300 lb. 
Wagon 35 gp 400 lb. 
Warship                           25,000                           gp                           —                           
 
Spellcasting and Services 
Service                             Cost                             
Coach cab 3 cp per mile 
Hireling, trained 3 sp per day 
Hireling, untrained 1 sp per day 
Messenger 2 cp per mile 
Road or gate toll 1 cp 
Ship’s passage 1 sp per mile 
Spell, 0-level Caster level × 5 gp
2
 
Spell, 1st-level Caster level × 10 gp
2
 
Spell, 2nd-level Caster level × 20 gp
2
 
Spell, 3rd-level Caster level × 30 gp
2
 
Spell, 4th-level Caster level × 40 gp
2
 
Spell, 5th-level Caster level × 50 gp
2
 
Spell, 6th-level Caster level × 60 gp
2
 
Spell, 7th-level Caster level × 70 gp
2
 
Spell, 8th-level Caster level × 80 gp
2
 
Spell, 9th-level Caster level × 90 gp
2
 
 
— No weight, or no weight worth noting. 
1 These items weigh one-quarter this amount 
when made for Small characters. Containers 
for Small characters also carry one-quarter the 
normal amount. 
2 See spell description for additional costs. If 
the additional costs put the spell’s total cost 
above 3,000 gp, that spell is not generally 
available, except by the DM’s permission. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
130 
perfect tools for the job, so you get a +2 circumstance bonus on Craft 
checks made with them. 
Climber’s  Kit:  A  climber’s  kit  includes  special  pitons,  boot  tips,  
gloves,  and  a  harness  that  aids  in  all  sorts  of  climbing.  This  is  the  
perfect  tool  for  climbing  and  gives  you  a  +2  circumstance  bonus  on  
Climb checks. 
Disguise  Kit:  This  bag  contains  cosmetics,  hair  dye,  and  small  
physical props. The kit is the perfect tool for disguise and provides a 
+2   circumstance   bonus   on   Disguise   checks.   A   disguise   kit   is   
exhausted after ten uses. 
Healer’s  Kit:  This  kit  is  full  of  herbs,  salves,  bandages  and  other  
useful  materials.  It  is  the  perfect  tool  for  healing  and  provides  a  +2  
circumstance bonus on Heal checks. A healer’s kit is exhausted after 
ten uses. 
Holly  and  Mistletoe:  Sprigs  of  holly  and  mistletoe  are  used  by  
druids  as  the  default  divine  focus  for  druid  spells.  Druids  can  easily  
find these plants in wooded areas and then harvest sprigs from them 
essentially for free. 
Holy  Symbol,  Silver  or  Wooden:  A  holy  symbol  focuses  posi-
tive energy. A cleric or paladin uses it as the focus for his spells and 
as a tool for turning undead. Each religion has its own holy symbol, 
and a sun symbol is the default holy symbol for clerics not associated 
with any particular religion. 
A  silver  holy  symbol  works  no  better  than  a  wooden  one,  but  it  
serves as a mark of status for the wielder. 
Unholy  Symbols:  An  unholy  symbol  is  like  a  holy  symbol  except  
that  it  focuses  negative  energy  and  is  used  by  evil  clerics  (or  by  
neutral  clerics  who  want  to  cast  evil  spells  or  command  undead).  A  
skull is the default unholy symbol for clerics not associated with any 
particular religion. 
Magnifying Glass: This simple lens allows a closer look at small 
objects.  It  is  also  useful  as  a  substitute  for  flint  and  steel  when  
starting fires. Lighting a fire with a magnifying glass requires light as 
bright  as  sunlight  to  focus,  tinder  to  ignite,  and  at  least  a  full-round  
action.   A   magnifying   glass   grants   a   +2   circumstance   bonus   on   
Appraise  checks  involving  any  item  that  is  small  or  highly  detailed,  
such as a gem. 
Musical    Instrument,    Common    or    Masterwork:    Popular    
instruments include the fife, recorder, lute, mandolin, and shawm. A 
masterwork instrument grants a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform 
checks involving its use. 
Scale,  Merchant’s:  This  scale  includes  a  small  balance  and  pans,  
plus   a   suitable   assortment   of   weights.   A   scale   grants   a   +2   cir-
cumstance   bonus   on   Appraise   checks   involving   items   that   are   
valued by weight, including anything made of precious metals. 
Spell  Component  Pouch:  This  small,  watertight  leather  belt  
pouch  has  many  compartments.  A  spellcaster  with  a  spell  compo-
nent  pouch  is  assumed  to  have  all  the  material  components  and  
focuses  needed  for  spellcasting,  except  for  those  components  that  
have a specific cost, divine focuses, and focuses that wouldn’t fit in a 
pouch  (such  as  the  natural  pool  that  a  druid  needs  to  look  into  to  
cast scrying). 
Spellbook,   Wizard’s   (Blank):  This  large,  leatherbound  book  
serves  as  a  wizard’s  reference.  A  spellbook  has  100  pages  of  parch-
ment, and each spell takes up one page per spell level (one page each 
for 0-level spells). See Space in the Spellbook, page 179. 
Thieves’  Tools:  This  kit  contains  the  tools  you  need  to  use  the  
Disable  Device  and  Open  Lock  skills.  The  kit  includes  one  or  more  
skeleton  keys,  long  metal  picks  and  pries,  a  long-nosed  clamp,  a  
small  hand  saw,  and  a  small  wedge  and  hammer.  Without  these  
tools,  you  must  improvise  tools,  and  you  take  a  –2  circumstance  
penalty on Disable Device and Open Locks checks. 
Thieves’  Tools,  Masterwork:  This  kit  contains  extra  tools  and  
tools  of  better  make,  which  grant  a  +2  circumstance  bonus  on  Dis-
able Device and Open Lock checks. 
Tool,  Masterwork:  This  well-made  item  is  the  perfect  tool  for  
the job. It grants a +2 circumstance bonus on a related skill check (if 
any).  Some  examples  of  this  sort  of  item  from  Table  7–8  include  
masterwork  artisan’s  tools,  masterwork  thieves’  tools,  disguise  kit,  
climber’s  kit,  healer’s  kit,  and  masterwork  musical  instrument.  This  
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
131
entry covers just about anything else. Bonuses provided by multiple 
masterwork items used toward the same skill check do not stack, so 
masterwork  pitons  and  a  masterwork  climber’s  kit  do  not  provide  a  
+4 bonus if used together on a Climb check. 
Water  Clock:  This  large,  bulky  contrivance  gives  the  time  accu-
rate to within half an hour per day since it was last set. It requires a 
source  of  water,  and  it  must  be  kept  still  because  it  marks  time  by  
the regulated flow of droplets of water. It is primarily an amusement 
for the wealthy and a tool for the student of arcane lore. Most people 
have  no  way  to  tell  exact  time,  and  there’s  little  point  in  knowing  
that it is 2:30 p.m. if nobody else does. 
 
CLOTHING 
Different characters may want different outfits for various occasions. 
A  beginning  character  is  assumed  to  have  an  artisan’s,  entertainer’s,  
explorer’s,  monk’s,  peasant’s,  scholar’s,  or  traveler’s  outfit.  This  first  
outfit  is  free  and  does  not  count  against  the  amount  of  weight  a  
character can carry. 
Artisan’s Outfit: This outfit includes a shirt with buttons, a skirt 
or  pants  with  a  drawstring,  shoes,  and  perhaps  a  cap  or  hat.  It  may  
also include a belt or a leather or cloth apron for carrying tools. 
Cleric’s   Vestments:   These   ecclesiastical   clothes   are   for   per-
forming priestly functions, not for adventuring. 
Cold  Weather  Outfit:  A  cold  weather  outfit  includes  a  wool  
coat,  linen  shirt,  wool  cap,  heavy  cloak,  thick  pants  or  skirt,  and  
boots.  This  outfit  grants  a  +5  circumstance  bonus  on  Fortitude  
saving  throws  against  exposure  to  cold  weather  (see  the  Dungeon 
Master’s Guide for information on cold dangers). 
Courtier’s  Outfit:  This  outfit  includes  fancy,  tailored  clothes  in  
whatever fashion happens to be the current style in the courts of the 
nobles.   Anyone   trying   to   influence   nobles   or   courtiers   while   
wearing  street  dress  will  have  a  hard  time  of  it  (–2  penalty  on  
Charisma-based  skill  checks  to  influence  such  individuals).  If  you  
wear  this  outfit  without  jewelry  (costing  an  additional  50  gp),  you  
look like an out-of-place commoner. 
Entertainer’s  Outfit:  This  set  of  flashy,  perhaps  even  gaudy,  
clothes  is  for  entertaining.  While  the  outfit  looks  whimsical,  its  
practical design lets you tumble, dance, walk a tightrope, or just run 
(if the audience turns ugly). 
Explorer’s  Outfit:  This  is  a  full  set  of  clothes  for  someone  who  
never   knows   what   to   expect.   It   includes   sturdy   boots,   leather   
breeches  or  a  skirt,  a  belt,  a  shirt  (perhaps  with  a  vest  or  jacket),  
gloves,  and  a  cloak.  Rather  than  a  leather  skirt,  a  leather  overtunic  
may  be  worn  over  a  cloth  skirt.  The  clothes  have  plenty  of  pockets  
(especially  the  cloak).  The  outfit  also  includes  any  extra  items  you  
might need, such as a scarf or a wide-brimmed hat. 
Monk’s   Outfit:   This   simple   outfit   includes   sandals,   loose   
breeches,  and  a  loose  shirt,  and  is  all  bound  together  with  sashes.  
The outfit is designed to give you maximum mobility, and it’s made 
of   high-quality   fabric.   You   can   hide   small   weapons   in   pockets   
hidden  in  the  folds,  and  the  sashes  are  strong  enough  to  serve  as  
short ropes. 
Noble’s  Outfit:  This  set  of  clothes  is  designed  specifically  to  be  
expensive and to show it. Precious metals and gems are worked into 
the clothing. To fit into the noble crowd, every would-be noble also 
needs   a   signet   ring   (see   Adventuring   Gear,   above)   and   jewelry   
(worth at least 100 gp). 
Peasant’s  Outfit: This set of clothes consists of a loose shirt and 
baggy  breeches,  or  a  loose  shirt  and  skirt  or  overdress.  Cloth  wrap-
pings are used for shoes. 
Royal  Outfit:  This  is  just  the  clothing,  not  the  royal  scepter,  
crown,  ring,  and  other  accoutrements.  Royal  clothes  are  ostenta-
tious, with gems, gold, silk, and fur in abundance. 
Scholar’s Outfit: Perfect for a scholar, this outfit includes a robe, 
a belt, a cap, soft shoes, and possibly a cloak. 
Traveler’s  Outfit:  This  set  of  clothes  consists  of  boots,  a  wool  
skirt or breeches, a sturdy belt, a shirt (perhaps with a vest or jacket), 
and an ample cloak with a hood. 
FOOD, DRINK, AND LODGING 
Many  travelers  are  lodged  by  guilds,  churches,  family,  or  nobility.  
Adventurers, however, typically pay for hospitality. 
Inn:  Poor  accommodations  at  an  inn  amount  to  a  place  on  the  
floor near the hearth, plus the use of a blanket if the innkeeper likes 
you  and  you’re  not  worried  about  fleas.  Common  accommodations  
consist of a place on a raised, heated floor, the use of a blanket and a 
pillow,   and   the   presence   of   a   higher   class   of   company.   Good   
accommodations consist of a small, private room with one bed, some 
amenities, and a covered chamber pot in the corner. 
Meals:  Poor  meals  might  be  composed  of  bread,  baked  turnips,  
onions,  and  water.  Common  meals  might  consist  of  bread,  chicken  
stew  (easy  on  the  chicken),  carrots,  and  watered-down  ale  or  wine.  
Good meals might be composed of bread and pastries, beef, peas, and 
ale or wine. 
 
MOUNTS AND RELATED GEAR 
Horses and other mounts let you travel faster and more easily. 
Barding,  Medium  Creature  and  Large  Creature:  Barding  is  a  
type  of  armor  that  covers  the  head,  neck,  chest,  body,  and  possibly  
legs  of  a  horse  or  other  mount.  Barding  made  of  medium  or  heavy  
armor  provides  better  protection  than  light  barding,  but  at  the  
expense  of  speed.  Barding  can  be  made  of  any  of  the  armor  types  
found on Table 7–6: Armor and Shields. 
Armor  for  a  horse  (a  Large  nonhumanoid  creature)  costs  four  
times as much as armor for a human (a Medium humanoid creature) 
and also weighs twice as much as the armor found on Table 7–6 (see 
Armor for Unusual Creatures, page 123). If the barding is for a pony 
or  other  Medium  mount,  the  cost  is  only  double,  and  the  weight  is  
the same as for Medium armor worn by a humanoid. 
Medium  or  heavy  barding  slows  a  mount  that  wears  it,  as  shown  
on the table below. 
 
  ———— Base Speed —––—— 
Barding (40 ft.) (50 ft.) (60 ft.) 
Medium 30 ft. 35 ft. 40 ft. 
Heavy                     30                     ft.
1
             35             ft.
1
             40             ft.
1
 
1 A mount wearing heavy armor moves at only triple its normal speed 
when running instead of quadruple.
 
 
Flying mounts can’t fly in medium or heavy barding. 
Barded  animals  require  special  attention.  You  must  take  care  to  
prevent  chafing  and  sores  caused  by  the  armor.  The  armor  must  be  
removed at night and ideally should not be put on the mount except 
to prepare for a battle. Removing and fitting barding takes five times 
as long as the figures given on Table 7–7: Donning Armor. A barded 
animal  cannot  be  used  to  carry  any  load  other  than  the  rider  and  
normal  saddlebags.  Because  of  this  limitation,  a  mounted  warrior  
often leads a second mount loaded with gear and supplies. 
Dog,  Riding:  This  Medium  dog  is  specially  trained  to  carry  a  
Small  humanoid  rider.  It  is  brave  in  combat  like  a  warhorse.  You  
take  no  damage  when  you  fall  from  a  riding  dog.  (See  the  Monster 
Manual for more information on riding dogs.) 
Donkey  or  Mule:  The  best  kinds  of  pack  animals  around,  don-
keys  and  mules  are  stolid  in  the  face  of  danger,  hardy,  surefooted,  
and  capable  of  carrying  heavy  loads  over  vast  distances.  Unlike  a  
horse, a donkey or a mule is willing (though not eager) to enter dun-
geons  and  other  strange  or  threatening  places.  (See  the  Monster 
Manual for more information on donkeys and mules.) 
Feed:  Horses,  donkeys,  mules,  and  ponies  can  graze  to  sustain  
themselves, but providing feed for them(such as oats) is much better 
because it provides a more concentrated form of energy, especially if 
the  animal  is  exerting  itself.  If  you  have  a  riding  dog,  you  have  to  
feed  it  at  least  some  meat,  which  may  cost  more  or  less  than  the  
given amount. 
Horse:  The  horse  is  the  best  all-around  work  animal  and  mount  
in  common  use.  A  horse  (other  than  a  pony)  is  suitable  as  a  mount  
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
132 
for a human, dwarf, elf, half-elf, or half-orc. A pony is smaller than a 
horse  and  is  a  suitable  mount  for  a  gnome  or  halfling.  (See  the  
Monster Manual for more information on horses and ponies.) 
Warhorses and warponies can be ridden easily into combat. Light 
horses,  ponies,  and  heavy  horses  are  hard  to  control  in  combat  (see  
Mounted Combat, page 157, and the Ride skill, page 80). 
Saddle,  Exotic:  An  exotic  saddle  is  like  a  normal  saddle  of  the  
same sort except that it is designed for an unusual mount, such as a 
hippogriff. Exotic saddles come in military, pack, and riding styles. 
Saddle,  Military:  A  military  saddle  braces  the  rider,  providing  a  
+2  circumstance  bonus  on  Ride  checks  related  to  staying  in  the  
saddle.  If  you’re  knocked  unconscious  while  in  a  military  saddle,  
you  have  a  75%  chance  to  stay  in  the  saddle  (compared  to  50%  for  a  
riding saddle). 
Saddle,  Pack:  A  pack  saddle  holds  gear  and  supplies,  but  not  a  
rider.  It  holds  as  much  gear  as  the  mount  can  carry.  (The  Monster 
Manual has notes on how much mounts can carry.) 
Saddle, Riding: The standard riding saddle supports a rider. 
Stabling: Includes a stable, feed, and grooming. 
 
TRANSPORT 
If  you  can’t  go  where  you  need  to  by  horse—whether  because  of  
excess gear or distance—you’ll need some other form of transport. 
Carriage:  This  four-wheeled  vehicle  can  transport  as  many  as  
four people within an enclosed cab, plus two drivers. In general, two 
horses (or other beasts of burden) draw it. A carriage comes with the 
harness needed to pull it. 
Cart: This two-wheeled vehicle can be drawn by a single horse (or 
other beast of burden). It comes with a harness. 
Galley: This three-masted ship has seventy oars on either side and 
requires  a  total  crew  of  200.  A  galley  is  130  feet  long  and  20  feet  
wide, and it can carry 150 tons of cargo or 250 soldiers. For 8,000 gp 
more,  it  can  be  fitted  with  a  ram  and  castles  with  firing  platforms  
fore,  aft,  and  amidships.  This  ship  cannot  make  sea  voyages  and  
sticks  to  the  coast.  It  moves  about  4  miles  per  hour  when  being  
rowed or under sail. 
Keelboat:  This  50-  to  75-foot-long  ship  is  15  to  20  feet  wide  and  
has a few oars to supplement its single mast with a square sail. It has 
a crew of eight to fifteen and can carry 40 to 50 tons of cargo or 100 
soldiers. It can make sea voyages, as well as sail down rivers (thanks 
to its flat bottom). It moves about 1 mile per hour. 
Longship:  This  75-foot-long  ship  with  forty  oars  requires  a  total  
crew of 50. It has a single mast and a square sail, and it can carry 50 
tons  of  cargo  or  120  soldiers.  A  longship  can  make  sea  voyages.  It  
moves about 3 miles per hour when being rowed or under sail. 
Rowboat: This 8- to 12-foot-long boat holds two or three Medium 
passengers. It moves about 1-1/2 miles per hour. 
Sailing Ship: This larger, seaworthy ship is 75 to 90 feet long and 
20  feet  wide  and  has  a  crew  of  20.  It  can  carry  150  tons  of  cargo.  It  
has square sails on its two masts and can make sea voyages. It moves 
about 2 miles per hour. 
Sled:  This  is  a  wagon  on  runners  for  moving  through  snow  and  
over ice. In general, two horses (or other beasts of burden) draw it. A 
sled comes with the harness needed to pull it. 
Wagon:  This  is  a  four-wheeled,  open  vehicle  for  transporting  
heavy loads. In general, two horses (or other beasts of burden) draw 
it. A wagon comes with the harness needed to pull it. 
Warship: This 100-foot-long ship has a single mast, although oars 
can  also  propel  it.  It  has  a  crew  of  60  to  80  rowers.  This  ship  can  
carry  160  soldiers,  but  not  for  long  distances,  since  there  isn’t  room  
for supplies to support that many people. The warship cannot make 
sea voyages and sticks to the coast. It is not used for cargo. It moves 
about 2-1/2 miles per hour when being rowed or under sail. 
 
SPELLCASTING AND SERVICES 
Sometimes the best solution for a problem is to hire someone else to 
take  care  of  it.  Since  the  characters  are  adventurers,  such  a  solution  
should  be  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule,  but  there  will  come  
times  when  the  PCs  prefer  to  pay  someone  else  to  handle  some-
thing, whether that something is to deliver a message, cast a spell, or 
ferry them across the sea. 
Coach Cab: The price given is for a ride in a coach that transports 
people  (and  light  cargo)  between  towns.  For  a  ride  in  a  cab  that  
transports passengers within a city, 1 copper piece usually takes you 
anywhere you need to go. 
Hireling,  Trained:  The  amount  given  is  the  typical  daily  wage  
for  mercenary  warriors,  masons,  craftsmen,  scribes,  teamsters,  and  
other  trained  hirelings.  This  value  represents  a  minimum  wage;  
many  such  hirelings  require  significantly  higher  pay  (see  the  Dun-
geon Master’s Guide for more details). 
Hireling,  Untrained:  The  amount  shown  is  the  typical  daily  
wage for laborers, porters, cooks, maids, and other menial workers. 
Messenger:  This  entry  includes  horse-riding  messengers  and  
runners. Those willing to carry a message to a place they were going 
anyway  (a  crew  member  on  a  ship,  for  example)  may  ask  for  only  
half the indicated amount. 
Road  or  Gate  Toll:  A  toll  is  sometimes  charged  to  cross  a  well-
trodden, well-kept, and well-guarded road to pay for patrols on it and 
for its upkeep. Occasionally, a large walled city charges a toll to enter 
or exit (or sometimes just to enter). 
Ship’s  Passage:  Most  ships  do  not  specialize  in  passengers,  but  
many  have  the  capability  to  take  a  few  along  when  transporting  
cargo.  Double  the  given  cost  for  creatures  larger  than  Medium  or  
creatures that are otherwise difficult to bring aboard a ship. 
Spell:  The  indicated  amount  is  how  much  it  costs  to  get  a  spell-
caster to cast a spell for you. This cost assumes that you can go to the 
spellcaster   and   have   the   spell   cast   at   his   or   her   convenience   
(generally  at  least  24  hours  later,  so  that  the  spellcaster  has  time  to  
prepare  the  spell  in  question).  If  you  want  to  bring  the  spellcaster  
somewhere to cast a spell, such as into a dungeon to cast knock on a 
secret  door  that  you  can’t  open,  you  need  to  negotiate  with  him  or  
her, and the default answer is no. 
The cost given is for a spell with no cost for a material component 
or  focus  component  and  no  XP  cost.  If  the  spell  includes  a  material  
component,  add  the  cost  of  that  component  to  the  cost  of  the  spell.  
If  the  spell  has  a  focus  component  (other  than  a  divine  focus),  add  
1/10 the cost of that focus to the cost of the spell. If the spell has an 
XP cost, add 5 gp per XP lost. For instance, to get a 9th-level cleric to 
cast commune for you, you need to pay 450 gp for a 5th-level spell at 
caster  level  9th,  plus  500  gp  for  the  100  XP  loss  that  the  caster  suf-
fers, plus 25 gp for the holy water, for a total of 975 gp. 
Furthermore,  if  a  spell  has  dangerous  consequences  (such  as  
contact  other  plane),  the  spellcaster  will  certainly  require  proof  that  
you  can  and  will  pay  for  dealing  with  any  such  consequences  (that  
is,  assuming  that  the  spellcaster  even  agrees  to  cast  such  a  spell,  
which isn’t certain). In the case of spells that transport the caster and 
characters  over  a  distance  (such  as  teleport),  you  will  likely  have  to  
pay  for  two  castings  of  the  spell,  even  if  you  aren’t  returning  with  
the caster. 
In  addition,  not  every  town  or  village  has  a  spellcaster  of  suffi-
cient  level  to  cast  any  spell.  In  general,  you  must  travel  to  a  small  
town  (or  larger  settlement)  to  be  reasonably  assured  of  finding  a  
spellcaster  capable  of  casting  1st-level  spells,  a  large  town  for  2nd-
level  spells,  a  small  city  for  3rd-  or  4th-level  spells,  a  large  city  for  
5th-  or  6th-level  spells,  and  a  metropolis  for  7th-  or  8th-level  spells.  
Even a metropolis isn’t guaranteed to have a local spellcaster able to 
cast  9th-level  spells,  so  seeking  out  such  a  caster  may  become  an  
adventure  itself.  (The  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  has  more  information  
on settlement sizes and demographics.) 
Because  you  must  get  an  actual  spellcaster  to  cast  a  spell  for  you  
and  can’t  rely  on  a  neutral  broker,  money  is  not  always  sufficient  to  
get  a  spell  cast.  If  the  spellcaster  is  opposed  to  you  on  religious,  
moral, or political grounds, you may not be able to get the spell you 
want  for  any  price.  The  DM  always  sets  the  final  price  of  any  
spellcasting you want to purchase. 
CHAPTER 7: 
EQUIPMENT
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ighty swords clash, arrows hiss through the air, claws 
rip  and  tear  and  rend;  these  are  the  thrilling  sounds  
of  battle.  D&D  adventurers  constantly  find  them-
selves   embroiled   in   combat   situations—and   they   
wouldn’t  have  it  any  other  way!  Whether  the  adven-
turers  must  fend  off  a  bandit  ambush  on  a  deserted  road  or  fight  
their way out of a bugbear lair in the deepest part of a dungeon, the 
rules  in  this  chapter  provides  an  exciting  way  to  solve  any  combat  
situation. 
Many special abilities and forms of damage that affect combat are 
also covered in the Dungeon Master’s Guide. 
 
THE BATTLE GRID 
To help visualize events in the fictional world of the D&D game, we 
recommend  the  use  of  miniature  figures  and  a  battle  grid.  A  battle  
grid, such as the one provided in the Dungeon Master’s Guide, consists 
of a grid of 1-inch squares. Each of these squares represents a 5-foot 
square in the game world. 
You can use the grid, along with miniature figures or some other 
form  of  markers  or  tokens,  to  show  the  marching  order  of  your  
adventuring  party  (they  can  walk  two  abreast  down  a  10-foot-wide  
dungeon  corridor  or  single  file  in  a  5-foot-wide  tunnel)  or  the  
relative location of the characters in any given situation. 
As  its  name  implies,  however,  the  best  use  for  a  battle  grid  is  
when  the  adventurers  charge  or  stumble  into  a  combat  situation.  
Then the grid helps everyone play out the battle. See the diagram on 
the following page for some specifics about the battle grid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW COMBAT WORKS 
Combat  in  the  D&D  game  is  cyclical;  everybody  acts  in  turn  in  a  
regular cycle of rounds. Combat follows this sequence: 
1.  Each  combatant  starts  out  flat-footed.  Once  a  combatant  
acts, he or she is no longer flat-footed. 
2.  The  DM  determines  which  characters  are  aware  of  their  
opponents  at  the  start  of  the  battle.  If  some  but  not  all  of  the  
combatants  are  aware  of  their  opponents,  a  surprise  round  
happens    before    regular    rounds    of    combat    begin.    The    
combatants  who  are  aware  of  the  opponents  can  act  in  the  
surprise  round,  so  they  roll  for  initiative.  In  initiative  order  
(highest to lowest), combatants who started the battle aware of 
their opponents each take one action (either a standard action 
or  a  move  action)  during  the  surprise  round.  Combatants  
who were unaware do not get to act in the surprise round. If 
no   one   or   everyone   starts   the   battle   aware,   there   is   no   
surprise round. 
3.  Combatants  who  have  not  yet  rolled  initiative  do  so.  
All  combatants  are  now  ready  to  begin  their  first  regular  
round of combat. 
4. Combatants act in initiative order (highest to lowest). 
5.  When  everyone  has  had  a  turn,  the  combatant  with  
the  highest  initiative  acts  again,  and  steps  4  and  5  repeat  
until combat ends. 
 
COMBAT STATISTICS 
This   section   summarizes   the   statistics   that   determine   
success in combat, and then details how to use them. 
 
 
133

 
 
134 
ATTACK ROLL 
An  attack  roll  represents  your  attempt  to  strike  your  opponent  on  
your  turn  in  a  round.  When  you  make  an  attack  roll,  you  roll  a  d20  
and  add  your  attack  bonus.  (Other  modifiers  may  also  apply  to  this  
roll.)  If  your  result  equals  or  beats  the  target’s  Armor  Class,  you  hit  
and deal damage. 
Automatic  Misses  and  Hits:  A  natural  1  (the  d20  comes  up  1)  
on an attack roll is always a miss. A natural 20 (the d20 comes up 20) 
is  always  a  hit.  A  natural  20  is  also  a  threat—a  possible  critical  hit  
(see the Critical Hits sidebar, page 140). 
 
ATTACK BONUS 
Your attack bonus with a melee weapon is: 
Base attack bonus + Strength modifier + size modifier 
With a ranged weapon, your attack bonus is: 
Base attack bonus + Dexterity modifier + size modifier 
+ range penalty 
 
Strength  Modifier:  Strength  helps  you  swing  a  weapon  harder  
and faster, so your Strength modifier applies to melee attack rolls. 
Dexterity    Modifier:    Dexterity    measures    coordination    and    
steadiness, so your Dexterity modifier applies to attacks with ranged 
weapons. 
Size  Modifier:  The  smaller  you  are,  the  bigger  other  creatures  
are  relative  to  you.  A  human  is  a  big  target  to  a  halfling,  just  as  an  
ogre is a big target to a human. Since this same size modifier applies 
to  Armor  Class,  two  creatures  of  the  same  size  strike  each  other  
normally, regardless of what size they actually are. 
 
Table 8–1: Size Modifiers 
Size Size Modifier Size Size Modifier 
Colossal                         –8                          Small                         +1                         
Gargantuan                   –4                   Tiny                   +2                   
Huge                             –2                             Diminutive                             +4                             
Large                             –1                             Fine                             +8                             
Medium                        +0 
Range  Penalty:  The  range  penalty  for  a  ranged  weapon  depends  
on  the  weapon  and  the  distance  to  the  target.  All  ranged  weapons  
have a range increment, such as 10 feet for a thrown dart or 100 feet 
for a longbow (see Table 7–5: Weapons, page 116). Any attack from a 
distance of less than one range increment is not penalized for range, 
so an arrow from a shortbow (range increment 60 feet) can strike at 
enemies  up  to  59  feet  away  with  no  penalty.  However,  each  full  
range increment causes a cumulative –2 penalty on the attack roll. A 
shortbow archer firing at a target 200 feet away takes a –6 penalty on 
his attack roll (because 200 feet is at least three range increments but 
not four increments). 
Thrown  weapons,  such  as  throwing  axes,  have  a  maximum  range  
of  five  range  increments.  Projectile  weapons,  such  as  bows,  can  
shoot up to ten increments. 
 
DAMAGE 
When  your  attack  succeeds,  you  deal  damage.  The  type  of  weapon  
used  (see  Table  7–5:  Weapons,  page  116)  determines  the  amount  of  
damage  you  deal.  Effects  that  modify  weapon  damage  apply  to  
unarmed strikes and the natural physical attack forms of creatures. 
Damage reduces a target’s current hit points. 
Minimum Damage: If penalties reduce the damage result to less 
than 1, a hit still deals 1 point of damage. 
Strength Bonus: When you hit with a melee or thrown weapon, 
including  a  sling,  add  your  Strength  modifier  to  the  damage  result.  
A Strength penalty, but not a bonus, applies on attacks made with a 
bow that is not a composite bow. 
Off-Hand  Weapon:  When  you  deal  damage  with  a  weapon  in  your  
off hand, you add only 1/2 your Strength bonus. 
Wielding  a  Weapon  Two-Handed:  When  you  deal  damage  with  a  
weapon that you are wielding two-handed, you add 1-1/2 times your 
Strength bonus. However, you don’t get this higher Strength bonus 
when using a light weapon with two hands (see Light, One-Handed, 
and Two-Handed Melee Weapons, page 113). 
Multiplying Damage: Sometimes you multiply damage by some 
factor,  such  as  on  a  critical  hit.  Roll  the  damage  (with  all  modifiers)  
multiple   times   and   total   the   results.   Note:   When   you   multiply   
damage  more  than  once,  each  multiplier  works  off  the  original,  
unmultiplied damage (see Multiplying, page 304). 
Exception:  Extra  damage  dice  over  and  above  a  weapon’s  normal  
damage, such as that dealt by a sneak attack or the special ability of a 
flaming sword, are never multiplied. 
For example, Krusk the half-orc barbarian has a Strength bonus of 
+3.  That  means  he  gets  a  +3  bonus  on  damage  rolls  when  using  a  
longsword,  a  +4  bonus  on  damage  when  using  a  greataxe  (two-
handed), and a +1 bonus to damage when using a weapon in his off 
hand.  His  critical  multiplier  with  a  greataxe  is  ×3,  so  if  he  scores  a  
critical hit with that weapon, he would roll 1d12+4 points of damage 
three times (the same as rolling 3d12+12). 
Ability Damage: Certain creatures and magical effects can cause 
temporary  ability  damage  (a  reduction  to  an  ability  score).  The  
Dungeon Master’s Guide has details on ability damage. 
 
ARMOR CLASS 
Your  Armor  Class  (AC)  represents  how  hard  it  is  for  opponents  to  
land a solid, damaging blow on you. It’s the attack roll result that an 
opponent  needs  to  achieve  to  hit  you.  The  average,  unarmored  
peasant has an AC of 10. Your AC is equal to the following: 
 
10 + armor bonus + shield bonus + Dexterity modifier 
+ size modifier 
 
Armor  and  Shield  Bonuses:  Your  armor  and  shield  each  pro-
vide  a  bonus  to  your  AC.  This  bonus  represents  their  ability  to  pro-
tect you from blows. 
Dexterity  Modifier:  If  your  Dexterity  is  high,  you  are  adept  at  
dodging blows. If your Dexterity is low, you are inept at it. That’s 