CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
163
Table 9–4: Hampered Movement 
                                                                Additional                                
Condition               Example               Movement               Cost 
Difficult terrain Rubble, undergrowth, steep ×2 
 slope, ice, cracked and pitted surface, 
                                uneven                                floor                                
Obstacle1 Low wall, deadfall, broken pillar ×2 
Poor visibility Darkness or fog ×2 
Impassable Floor-to-ceiling wall, closed door, — 
                                blocked                                passage                                
1 May require a skill check
 
 
 Local, for exploring an area, measured in feet per minute. 
 Overland,  for  getting  from  place  to  place,  measured  in  miles  per  
hour or miles per day. 
 
Modes of Movement: While moving at the different move-
ment scales, creatures generally walk, hustle, or run. 
Walk:  A  walk  represents  unhurried  but  purposeful  move-
ment at 3 miles per hour for an unencumbered human. 
Hustle: A hustle is a jog at about 6 miles per hour for an 
unencumbered  human.  A  character  moving  his  or  her  
speed twice in a single round, or moving that speed in 
the  same  round  that  he  or  she  performs  a  standard  
action  or  another  move  action  is  hustling  when  he  or  
she moves. 
Run (×3): Moving three times speed is a running pace 
for  a  character  in  heavy  armor.  It  represents  about  9  
miles per hour for a human in full plate. 
Run (×4): Moving four times speed is a running pace 
for a character in light, medium, or no armor. It repre-
sents  about  12  miles  per  hour  for  an  unencumbered  
human, or 8 miles per hour for a human in chainmail. 
 
TACTICAL MOVEMENT 
Use  tactical  movement  for  combat,  as  detailed  on  
page  147.  Characters  generally  don’t  walk  during  
combat—they  hustle  or  run.  A  character  who  
moves  his  or  her  speed  and  takes  some  action,  
such as attacking or casting a spell, is hustling for 
about  half  the  round  and  doing  something  
else the other half. 
Hampered Movement: Difficult ter-
rain,   obstacles,   or   poor   visibility   can   
hamper  movement.  When  movement  is  
hampered, each square moved into usu-
ally  counts  as  two  squares,  effectively  
reducing  the  distance  that  a  character  
can  cover  in  a  move.  For  example,  a  
character   moving   through   difficult   
terrain  (such  as  undergrowth)  pays  2  
squares    of    movement    per    square    
moved into (double the normal cost). 
If  more  than  one  condition  applies,  
multiply  together  all  additional  costs  
that  apply.  (This  is  a  specific  exception  
to  the  normal  rule  for  doubling;  
see   page   304.)   For   instance,   a   
character  moving  through  diffi-
cult   terrain   in   darkness   would   
pay  4  squares  of  movement  per  
square  moved  into  (double  cost  
times  double  cost  is  quadruple  
cost). 
In   some   situations,   your   movement   may   be   so   
hampered  that  you  don’t  have  sufficient  speed  even  to  move  5  
feet  (1  square).  In  such  a  case,  you  may  use  a  full-round  action  to  
move  5  feet  (1  square)  in  any  direction,  even  diagonally.  Even  
though  this  looks  like  a  5-foot  step,  it’s  not,  and  thus  it  provokes  
attacks  of  opportunity  normally.  (You  can’t  take  advantage  of  this  
rule   to   move   through   impassable   terrain   or   to   move   when   all   
movement is prohibited to you, such as while paralyzed.) 
You  can’t  run  or  charge  through  any  square  that  would  hamper  
your movement. 
 
LOCAL MOVEMENT 
Characters  exploring  an  area  use  local  movement,  measured  in  feet  
per minute. 
Walk: A character can walk without a problem on the local scale. 
Hustle:  A  character  can  hustle  without  a  problem  on  the  local  
scale.  See  Overland  Movement,  below,  for  movement  measured  in  
miles per hour. 
Run: A character with a Constitution score of 9 or higher can run 
for a minute without a problem. Generally, a character can run for a 
minute  or  two  before  having  to  rest  for  a  minute  (see  Run,  page  
144). 
 
 
Adventurers prepare for their 
next challenge. 
 
Illus. by J. Jarvis 
CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
164 
Table 9–5: Terrain and Overland Movement 
Terrain  Highway Road or Trail Trackless 
Desert, sandy ×1 ×1/2 ×1/2 
Forest                            ×1                            ×1                            ×1/2                            
Hills                               ×1                               ×3/4                               ×1/2                               
Jungle                            ×1                            ×3/4                            ×1/4                            
Moor                             ×1                             ×1                             ×3/4                             
Mountains                   ×3/4                    ×3/4                    ×1/2                   
Plains                            ×1                            ×1                            ×3/4                            
Swamp                          ×1                          ×3/4                          ×1/2                          
Tundra, frozen ×1 ×3/4 ×3/4 
 
Table 9–6: Mounts and Vehicles 
Mount/Vehicle Per Hour Per Day 
Mount (carrying load) 
Light horse or light warhorse 6 miles 48 miles 
Light horse (151–450 lb.)
1
                    4                    miles                    32                    miles                    
Light warhorse (231–690 lb.)
1
              4              miles                 32              miles              
Heavy horse or heavy warhorse 5 miles 40 miles 
Heavy horse (201–600 lb.)
1
 3-1/2 miles 28 miles 
Heavy warhorse (301–900 lb.)
1
 3-1/2 miles 28 miles 
Pony or warpony 4 miles 32 miles 
Pony (76–225 lb.)
1
                                3                                miles                                24                                miles                                
Warpony (101–300 lb.)
1
                        3                        miles                        24                        miles                        
Donkey or mule 3 miles 24 miles 
Donkey (51–150 lb.)
1
                            2                            miles                            16                            miles                            
Mule (231–690 lb.)
1
                              2                              miles                              16                              miles                              
Dog, riding 4 miles 32 miles 
Dog, riding (101–300 lb.)
1
                    3                    miles                    24                    miles                    
Cart or wagon 2 miles 16 miles 
Ship 
Raft or barge (poled or towed)
2
 1/2 mile 5 miles 
Keelboat (rowed)
2
 1 mile 10 miles 
Rowboat (rowed)
2
 1-1/2 miles 15 miles 
Sailing ship (sailed) 2 miles 48 miles 
Warship (sailed and rowed) 2-1/2 miles 60 miles 
Longship (sailed and rowed) 3 miles 72 miles 
Galley (rowed and sailed) 4 miles 96 miles 
1 Quadrupeds, such as horses, can carry heavier loads than characters 
can. See Carrying Capacity, above, for more information. 
2 Rafts, barges, keelboats, and rowboats are used on lakes and rivers. 
If going downstream, add the speed of the current (typically 3 miles 
per hour) to the speed of the vehicle. In addition to 10 hours of 
being rowed, the vehicle can also float an additional 14 hours, if 
someone can guide it, so add an additional 42 miles to the daily 
distance traveled. These vehicles can’t be rowed against any 
significant current, but they can be pulled upstream by draft animals 
on the shores.
 
 
OVERLAND MOVEMENT 
Characters   covering   long   distances   cross-country   use   overland   
movement.  Overland  movement  is  measured  in  miles  per  hour  or  
miles  per  day.  A  day  represents  8  hours  of  actual  travel  time.  For  
rowed  watercraft,  a  day  represents  10  hours  of  rowing.  For  a  sailing  
ship, it represents 24 hours. 
Walk:  A  character  can  walk  8  hours  in  a  day  of  travel  without  a  
problem. Walking for longer than that can wear him or her out (see 
Forced March, below). 
Hustle:  A  character  can  hustle  for  1  hour  without  a  problem.  
Hustling  for  a  second  hour  in  between  sleep  cycles  deals  1  point  of  
nonlethal damage, and each additional hour deals twice the damage 
taken  during  the  previous  hour  of  hustling.  A  character  who  takes  
any  nonlethal  damage  from  hustling  becomes  fatigued.  A  fatigued  
character  can’t  run  or  charge  and  takes  a  penalty  of  –2  to  Strength  
and Dexterity. Eliminating the nonlethal damage also eliminates the 
fatigue. 
Run:   A   character   can’t   run   for   an   extended   period   of   time.   
Attempts to run and rest in cycles effectively work out to a hustle. 
Terrain:  The  terrain  through  which  a  character  travels  affects  
how  much  distance  he  or  she  can  cover  in  an  hour  or  a  day  (see  
Table 9–5: Terrain and Overland Movement). Travel is quickest on a 
highway,  not  quite  as  fast  on  a  road  or  trail,  and  slowest  through  
trackless terrain. A highway is a straight, major, paved road. A road is 
typically  a  dirt  track.  A  trail  is  like  a  road,  except  that  it  allows  only  
single-file travel and does not benefit a party traveling with vehicles. 
Trackless terrain is a wild area with no paths. 
Forced March: In a day of normal walking, a character walks for 
8 hours. The rest of the daylight time is spent making and breaking 
camp, resting, and eating. 
A character can walk for more than 8 hours in a day by making a 
forced  march.  For  each  hour  of  marching  beyond  8  hours,  a  Con-
stitution  check  (DC  10,  +2  per  extra  hour)  is  required.  If  the  check  
fails, the character takes 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. A character 
who  takes  any  nonlethal  damage  from  a  forced  march  becomes  
fatigued.   Eliminating   the   nonlethal   damage   also   eliminates   the   
fatigue.  It’s  possible  for  a  character  to  march  into  unconsciousness  
by pushing himself too hard. 
Mounted  Movement:  A  mount  bearing  a  rider  can  move  at  a  
hustle.   The   damage   it   takes   when   doing   so,   however,   is   lethal   
damage, not nonlethal damage. The creature can also be ridden in a 
forced  march,  but  its  Constitution  checks  automatically  fail,  and,  
again,  the  damage  it  takes  is  lethal  damage.  Mounts  also  become  
fatigued   when   they   take   any   damage   from   hustling   or   forced   
marches. 
See  Table  9–6:  Mounts  and  Vehicles  for  mounted  speeds  and  
speeds for vehicles pulled by draft animals. 
Waterborne  Movement:  See  Table  9–6:  Mounts  and  Vehicles  
for speeds for water vehicles. 
 
EXPLORATION 
Adventurers  spend  time  exploring  dark  caverns,  cursed  ruins,  cat-
acombs,  and  other  dangerous  and  forbidding  areas.  A  little  careful  
forethought can help the characters in their adventures. 
 
PREPARATIONS 
Characters should have the supplies they need for their adventures: 
arrows,  food,  water,  torches,  bedrolls,  or  whatever  is  needed  for  the  
task  at  hand.  Rope,  chains,  crowbars,  and  other  tools  can  come  in  
handy,  too.  Characters  should  have  ranged  weapons,  if  possible,  for  
combats in which they can’t close with the enemy (or don’t want to). 
Horses  are  useful  for  overland  journeys,  while  sure-footed  pack  
donkeys and mules can be handy for exploring ruins and dungeons. 
 
VISION AND LIGHT 
Characters  need  a  way  to  see  in  the  dark,  dangerous  places  where  
they  often  find  adventures.  Dwarves  and  half-orcs  have  darkvision,  
but everyone else needs light to see by. Typically, adventurers bring 
along torches or lanterns, and spellcasters have spells that can create 
light.  See  Table  9–7:  Light  Sources  and  Illumination  for  the  radius  
that a light source illuminates and how long it lasts. 
In an area of bright light, all characters can see clearly. A creature 
can’t hide in an area of bright light unless it is invisible or has cover. 
In  an  area  of  shadowy  illumination,  a  character  can  see  dimly.  
Creatures  within  this  area  have  concealment  (see  page  152)  relative  
to that character. A creature in an area of shadowy illumination can 
make a Hide check to conceal itself (see page 76). 
In  areas  of  darkness,  creatures  without  darkvision  are  effectively  
blinded.  In  addition  to  the  obvious  effects,  a  blinded  creature  has  a  
50% miss chance in combat (all opponents have total concealment), 
CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
165
Table 9–7: Light Sources and Illumination 
Object                              Bright                              Shadowy                              Duration                              
Candle                             n/a
1
 5 ft. 1 hr. 
Everburning torch 20 ft. 40 ft. Permanent 
Lamp, common 15 ft. 30 ft. 6 hr./pint 
Lantern, bullseye
2
 60-ft. cone 120-ft. cone 6 hr./pint 
Lantern, hooded 30 ft. 60 ft. 6 hr./pint 
Sunrod 30 ft. 60 ft. 6 hr. 
Torch 20 ft. 40 ft. 1 hr. 
 
Spell                                Bright                                Shadowy                                Duration                                
Continual flame 20 ft. 40 ft. Permanent 
Dancing lights (torches)  20 ft. (each) 40 ft. (each) 1 min. 
Daylight 60 ft. 120 ft. 30 min. 
Light 20 ft. 40 ft. 10 min. 
1 A candle does not provide bright illumination, only shadowy 
illumination. 
2 A bullseye lantern illuminates a cone, not a radius.
 
 
loses  any  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC,  takes  
a   –2   penalty   to   AC,   moves   at   half   
speed,   and   takes   a   –4   penalty   on   
Search checks and most Strength and 
Dexterity-based skill checks. 
Characters   with   low-light   vision   
(elves, gnomes, and half-elves) can see 
objects  twice  as  far  away  as  the  given  
radius.  Double  the  effective  radius  of  
bright  light  and  of  shadowy  illumina-
tion     for     such     characters.     For     
example,   a   torch   provides   bright   
illumination  to  a  radius  of  40  feet  
(rather  than  20  feet)  for  a  character  
with     low-light     vision,     and     it     
provides  shadowy  illumination  to  a  
radius   of   80   feet   (rather   than   40   
feet). 
Characters       with       darkvision       
(dwarves  and  half-orcs)  can  see  lit  
areas  normally  as  well  as  dark  areas  
within 60 feet. A creature can’t hide 
within   60   feet   of   a   character   with   
darkvision   unless   it   is   invisible   or   has   
cover. 
 
BREAKING AND 
ENTERING 
There  inevitably  comes  a  time  when  a  
character     must     break     something,     
whether it’s a door, a chain, or a chest 
full of treasure. 
When   attempting   to   break   an   
object,  you  have  two  choices:  smash  it  
with  a  weapon  or  break  it  with  sheer  
strength. 
 
Smashing an Object 
Smashing   a   weapon   or   shield   with   a   slashing   or   bludgeoning   
weapon  is  accomplished  by  the  sunder  special  attack  (see  Sunder,  
page  158).  Smashing  an  object  is  a  lot  like  sundering  a  weapon  or  
shield,  except  that  your  attack  roll  is  opposed  by  the  object’s  AC.  
Generally,  you  can  smash  an  object  only  with  a  bludgeoning  or  
slashing weapon. 
Armor  Class:  Objects  are  easier  to  hit  than  creatures  because  
they  usually  don’t  move,  but  many  are  tough  enough  to  shrug  off  
some damage from each blow. An object’s Armor Class is equal to 10 
+  its  size  modifier  +  its  Dexterity  modifier.  An  inanimate  object  has  
not only a Dexterity of 0 (–5 penalty to AC), but also an additional –2 
penalty to its AC. Furthermore, if you take a full-round action to line 
up  a  shot,  you  get  an  automatic  hit  with  a  melee  weapon  and  a  +5  
bonus on attack rolls with a ranged weapon. 
Hardness:  Each  object  has  hardness—a  number  that  represents  
how  well  it  resists  damage.  Whenever  an  object  takes  damage,  
subtract its hardness from the damage. Only damage in excess of its 
hardness  is  deducted  from  the  object’s  hit  points  (see  Table  9–8:  
Common  Armor,  Weapon,  and  Shield  Hardness  and  Hit  Points;  
Table  9–9:  Substance  Hardness  and  Hit  Points;  and  Table  9–11:  
Object Hardness and Hit Points). 
Hit Points: An object’s hit point total depends on what it is made 
of  and  how  big  it  is  (see  Table  9–8,  Table  9–9,  and  Table  9–11).  
When an object’s hit points reach 0, it’s ruined. 
Very   large   objects   have   separate   hit   point   totals   for   
different  sections.  For  example,  you  can  attack  and  ruin  a  
wagon wheel without destroying the whole wagon. 
Energy  Attacks:  Acid  and  sonic  attacks  deal  
damage  to  most  objects  just  as  they  do  to  
creatures;    roll    damage    and    apply    it    
normally  after  a  successful  hit.  Elec-
tricity  and  fire  attacks  deal  half  
damage  to  most  objects;  divide  
the  damage  dealt  by  2  before  
applying the hardness. Cold 
attacks    deal    one-quarter    
damage   to   most   objects;   
divide  the  damage  dealt  
by  4  before  applying  the  
hardness. 
Ranged  Weapon  Dam-
age:   Objects   take   half   
damage from ranged weap-
ons  (unless  the  weapon  is  a  
siege     engine     or     something     
similar).  Divide  the  damage  dealt  
by  2  before  applying  the  object’s  
hardness. 
Ineffective  Weapons:  The  DM  may  
determine  that  certain  weapons  just  
can’t  effectively  deal  damage  to  certain  
objects.  For  example,  you  may  have  a  
hard  time  chopping  down  a  door  by  
shooting  arrows  at  it  or  cutting  a  robe  
with a club. 
Immunities:  Objects  are  immune  to  
nonlethal    damage    and    to    critical    hits.    Even    
animated objects, which are otherwise considered 
creatures,  have  these  immunities  because  they  
are constructs. 
Magic  Armor,  Shields,  and  Weapons:  Each  +1  of  
enhancement  bonus  adds  2  to  the  hardness  of  
armor,  a  weapon,  or  a  shield  and  +10  to  the  item’s  hit  
points.  For  example,  a  +1  longsword  has  hardness  12  and  
15 hp, while a +3 heavy steel shield has hardness 16 and 50 hp. 
Vulnerability  to  Certain  Attacks:  The  DM  may  rule  that  certain  
attacks  are  especially  successful  against  some  objects.  For  example,  
it’s easy to light a curtain on fire, chop down a tree with an ax, or rip 
up  a  scroll.  In  such  cases,  attacks  deal  double  their  normal  damage  
and may (at the DM’s discretion) ignore the object’s hardness. 
Damaged  Objects:  A  damaged  object  remains  fully  functional  until  
the item’s hit points are reduced to 0, at which point it is destroyed. 
For instance, the wielder of a damaged weapon takes no penalty due 
to   the   weapon’s   damage,   and   damaged   armor   and   shields   still   
Illus. by S. Wood 
CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
166 
provide their full normal bonus to AC. Damaged (but not destroyed) 
objects can be repaired with the Craft skill (see page 70). 
Saving   Throws:   Nonmagical,   unattended   items   never   make   
saving   throws.   They   are   considered   to   have   failed   their   saving   
throws,  so  they  always  are  affected  by  (for  instance)  a  disintegrate 
spell.  An  item  attended  by  a  character  (being  grasped,  touched,  or  
worn)  makes  saving  throws  as  the  character  (that  is,  using  the  
character’s saving throw bonus). 
Table 9–8: Common Armor, Weapon, 
and Shield Hardness and Hit Points 
Weapon or Shield Example Hardness HP
1
 
Light blade Short sword 10 2 
One-handed blade Longsword 10 5 
Two-handed blade Greatsword 10 10 
Light metal-hafted weapon Light mace 10 10 
One-handed metal-hafted weapon  Heavy mace 10 20 
Light hafted weapon Handaxe 5 2 
One-handed hafted weapon Battleaxe 5 5 
Two-handed hafted weapon Greataxe 5 10 
Projectile weapon Crossbow 5 5 
Armor                                                —                                                special
2
          armor          
   bonus × 5 
Buckler                                              —                                              10                                              5                                              
Light wooden shield — 5 7 
Heavy wooden shield — 5 15 
Light steel shield — 10 10 
Heavy steel shield — 10 20 
Tower shield — 5 20 
1 The hp value given is for Medium armor, weapons, and shields. 
Divide by 2 for each size category of the item smaller than Medium, or 
multiply it by 2 for each size category larger than Medium. 
2 Varies by material; see Table 9–9. 
 
Table 9–9: Substance Hardness and Hit Points 
Substance           Hardness               Hit           Points           
Paper or cloth 0 2/inch of thickness 
Rope 0 2/inch of thickness 
Glass 1 1/inch of thickness 
Ice 0 3/inch of thickness 
Leather or hide 2 5/inch of thickness 
Wood 5 10/inch of thickness 
Stone 8 15/inch of thickness 
Iron or steel 10 30/inch of thickness 
Mithral 15 30/inch of thickness 
Adamantine 20 40/inch of thickness 
Table 9–10: Size and Armor Class of Objects 
Size (Example) AC Modifier Size (Example) AC Modifier 
Colossal (broad –8 Medium (barrel) +0 
side of a barn)  Small (chair) +1 
Gargantuan (narrow     –4 Tiny (book) +2 
side of a barn)  Diminutive (scroll) +4 
Huge (wagon) –2 Fine (potion) +8 
Large (big door) –1 
 
Table 9–11: Object Hardness and Hit Points 
Object Hardness Hit Points Break DC 
Rope (1 inch diam.) 0 2 23 
Simple wooden door 5 10 13 
Small chest 5 1 17 
Good wooden door 5 15 18 
Treasure                       chest                       5                       15                       23                       
Strong wooden door 5 20 23 
Masonry wall (1 ft. thick) 8 90 35 
Hewn stone (3 ft. thick) 8 540 50 
Chain                                        10                                        5                                        26                                        
Manacles                       10                       10                       26                       
Masterwork                       manacles                       10                       10                       28                       
Iron door (2 in. thick) 10 60 28 
 
Table 9–12: DCs to Break or Burst Items 
Strength Check to: DC 
Break down simple door 13 
Break down good door 18 
Break down strong door 23 
Burst rope bonds 23 
Bend iron bars 24 
Break down barred door 25 
Burst chain bonds 26 
Break down iron door 28 
 
Condition                                 DC                                 Adjustment
1
 
Hold portal                                             +5                                             
Arcane lock                                           +10                                           
1 If both apply, use the larger number. 
HOW  PLAYERS CAN HELP 
Here are a few ways in which you can help the game go more smoothly.
Mapping: Someone should keep a map of places you explorer so that
you  know  where  you’ve  been  and  where  you  have  yet  to  explore.  The
responsibility for mapping can be rotated from person to person, if more
than  one  player  likes  to  do  this  sort  of  thing,  but  as  a  rule  the  same
person should be the mapper through a single playing session. 
A map is most useful and most important when the characters are in
a  dungeon  setting—an  environment  with  lots  of  corridors,  doors,  and
rooms  that  would  be  almost  impossible  to  navigate  through  without  a
record of what parts the characters have already explored. 
To make a map, you start with a blank sheet of paper (graph paper is
best)  and  draw  the  floor  plan  of  the  dungeon  as  you  and  your  group  
discover  it  and  the  Dungeon  Master  describes  what  you’re  seeing.  For
example,  when  the  characters  come  to  a  new,  empty  room,  the  DM
might  say,  “The  door  you  have  opened  leads  east  into  a  room  23  feet
wide and 30 feet deep. The door is in the middle of the room’s west wall,
and  you  can  see  two  other  doors:  one  in  the  north  wall  near  the  corner
with  the  east  wall,  and  one  in  the  east  wall  about  5  feet  south  of  the
middle.” Or, if it’s easier for you to visualize, the DM might express the
information  this  way:  “From  the  north  edge  of  the  door,  the  wall  goes  
two squares north, six squares east, five squares south, six squares west, 
and  then  north  back  to  the  door.  There’s  a  door  on  the  sixth  square  o
f 
the north wall and on the fourth square of the east wall.” 
Party  Notes:It  often  pays  to  keep  notes:  names  of  NPCs  the  heroes  
have  met,  treasure  the  group  has  won,  secrets  the  characters  have  
learned,  and  so  forth.  The  Dungeon  Master  might  keep  track  of  all  this  
information  for  his  or  her  own  benefit,  but  even  so  it  can  be  handy  for  
you to jot down facts that might be needed later—at the least, doing this 
prevents  you  from  having  to  ask  the  Dungeon  Master,  “What  was  the  
name of that old man we met in the woods last week?” 
Character Notes: You should keep track of hit points, spells, and other 
characteristics about your character that change during an adventure on 
scratch paper. Between playing sessions, you might decide to write some 
of  this  information  directly  on  your  character  sheet—but  don’t  worry  
about  updating  the  sheet  constantly.  For  instance,  it  would  be  tedious  
(and  could  make  a  mess  of  the  sheet)  if  you  erased  your  character’s  
current hit points and wrote in a new number every time he or she took 
damage. 
CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
167
Magic  items  always  get  saving  throws.  A  magic  item’s  Fortitude,  
Reflex,  and  Will  save  bonuses  are  equal  to  2  +  one-half  its  caster  
level.  An  attended  magic  item  either  makes  saving  throws  as  its  
owner  or  uses  its  own  saving  throw  bonus,  whichever  is  better.  
(Caster  levels  of  magic  items  are  covered  in  the  Dungeon  Master’s  
Guide.) 
Example of Breaking an Object: Lidda, a rogue, can’t pick the lock on 
the big treasure chest that Mialee, the elf, just found behind a secret 
door,  so  Krusk,  the  barbarian,  volunteers  to  open  it  in  a  more  
straightforward  manner.  The  chest,  made  of  wood,  has  hardness  5,  
so the chest takes only 5 points of damage from his attack. The wood 
is  1  inch  thick,  so  it  had  10  hit  points.  Now  it  has  5.  Krusk  has  
gouged the wood but not yet broken the chest open. On his second 
attack,  he  deals  4  points  of  damage.  That’s  lower  than  the  chest’s  
hardness, so the chest takes no damage at all—a glancing blow. His 
third  blow,  however,  deals  12  points  of  damage  (which  means  the  
chest takes 7), and the chest breaks open. 
Animated   Objects:   Animated   objects   (see   the   Monster   Manual) 
count  as  creatures  for  purposes  of  determining  their  Armor  Class  
(do not treat them as inanimate objects). 
 
Breaking Items 
When a character tries to break something with sudden force rather 
than by dealing damage, use a Strength check (rather than an attack 
roll  and  damage  roll,  as  with  the  sunder  special  attack)  to  see  
whether   he   or   she   succeeds.   The   DC   depends   more   on   the   
construction  of  the  item  than  on  the  material.  For  instance,  an  iron  
door with a weak lock can be forced open much more easily than it 
can be hacked down. 
If an item has lost half or more of its hit points, the DC to break it 
drops by 2. 
Larger  and  smaller  creatures  get  size  bonuses  and  size  penalties  
on   Strength   checks   to   break   open   doors   as   follows:   Fine   –16,   
Diminutive  –12,  Tiny  –8,  Small  –4,  Large  +4,  Huge  +8,  Gargantuan  
+12, Colossal +16. 
A  crowbar  (page  126)  or  portable  ram  (page  127)  improves  a  
character’s chance of breaking open a door. 
 
MARCHING ORDER 
The  characters  in  a  party  need  to  decide  what  their  matching  order  
is.  Marching  order  is  the  relative  position  of  the  characters  to  each  
other  while  they  are  moving  (who  is  in  front  of  or  next  to  whom).  
Arrange  your  miniature  figures  on  the  battle  grid  to  represent  the  
PC’s  relative  locations.  You  can  change  the  marching  order  as  the  
party  enters  different  areas,  as  characters  get  wounded,  or  at  other  
times for any reason. 
In  a  marching  order,  the  sturdiest  characters,  such  as  barbarians,  
fighters,  and  paladins,  usually  go  in  front.  Wizards,  sorcerers,  and  
bards  often  find  a  place  in  the  middle  or  back  of  the  party,  where  
they  are  protected  from  direct  attack.  Clerics  and  druids  are  good  
choices  for  rear  guard.  They’re  tough  enough  to  withstand  a  rear  
attack,  and  they’re  important  enough  as  healers  that  it’s  risky  to  put  
them  in  the  front  line.  Rogues,  rangers,  and  monks  might  serve  as  
stealthy  scouts,  though  they  have  to  be  careful  if  they’re  away  from  
the safety of the party. 
If the characters are not far apart, they can protect each other, but 
they’re  more  vulnerable  to  many  spells  when  they  cluster  together,  
so sometimes it pays to spread out a little. 
 
TREASURE 
When  characters  undertake  adventures,  they  usually  end  up  with  
some  amount  of  silver,  gold,  gems,  or  other  treasure.  These  rewards  
might  be  ancient  treasures  that  they  have  unearthed,  the  hoards  of  
the  villains  they  have  conquered,  or  pay  from  a  patron  who  hired  
them to go on the adventure. 
Splitting  Treasure:  Split  treasure  evenly  among  the  characters  
who  participated.  Some  characters  may  be  of  higher  level  than  
others,  or  some  might  happen  to  have  done  more  on  a  particular  
adventure  than  others  did,  but  the  simplest,  fastest,  and  best  policy  
is to split treasure up evenly. 
Illus. by J. Foster 
Lidda savors the rewards of opening the treasure chest.
CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
168 
Special  Items:  While  gems  can  be  
cashed  in  for  gold  pieces  and  the  coins  
split evenly among adventurers, some 
treasures  can’t  be  split  up  so  easily.  
Magic   items,   for   instance,   can   be   
sold,  but  only  for  half  of  what  they  
would   cost   to   buy,   so   it’s   usually   
better  for  characters  to  keep  them.  
When  a  character  gets  a  magic  item,  
count  half  its  cost  against  his  or  her  
share   of   the   treasure.   For   instance,   if   
Jozan,  Lidda,  Mialee,  and  Tordek  split  a  
treasure  of  5,000  gp  and  a  +1  large  steel  
shield,   the   group   would   count   the   
magic   shield   as   worth   500   gp,   
roughly  half  the  price  someone  
would  have  to  pay  to  
buy    one.    Since    
the     treasure     is     
worth    5,500    gp    
altogether, three char-
acters    would    each    
get   1,375   gp,   and   
the   fourth   char-
acter (probably 
Tordek         or         
Jozan) would get the shield (valued at 
500 gp) plus 875 gp in coin. 
If more than one character wants 
a  single  item,  those  interested  in  it  
can  bid  for  it.  For  example,  Jozan  
and  Tordek  both  want  the  shield,  
so    they    bid    over    how    much    
they’re  each  willing  to  “pay”  for  
it.  Tordek  wins  the  bid  at  800  
gp.     That     means     the     total     
treasure   is   5,800   gp.   Mialee,   
Jozan,    and    Lidda    each    get    
1,450  gp,  and  Tordek  gets  the  
shield (800 gp) plus 650 gp. 
A  character  can  only  bid  as  
much  as  his  or  her  share  of  the  
treasure would amount to, unless 
he  or  she  has  extra  gold  pieces  
or  treasure  to  back  up  the  bid.  
For  example,  if  Tordek  had  no  
other   treasure   from   earlier   
adventures,    the    most    he    
could   bid   for   the   magic   
shield    is    1,250    gp—he    
would  get  the  shield,  and  
the    other    three    char-
acters   would   split   the   
5,000 gp. 
If  no  one  is  willing  
to  take  a  special  item,  
the   party   members   
should   sell   it   (for   
half    its    cost,    as    
listed        in        the        
Dungeon    Master’s    
Guide, if they can 
find     a     buyer)     
and split the gold evenly. 
 
Costs:  Sometimes  characters  incur  costs  on  adventures.  A  char-
acter  turned  to  stone  by  a  basilisk  may  need  a  break  enchantment 
spell, and it costs at least 450 gp to pay a cleric to cast that spell. (See 
Table 7–8: Goods and Services, page 128. A cleric must be at least 9th 
level to cast break enchantment, which is a 5th-level spell). The default 
policy  is  to  pay  these  costs  out  of  the  treasure  found  on  the  adven-
ture,  as  a  sort  of  “adventurer’s  insurance,”  and  then  to  split  what-
ever’s left. 
Party  Fund: The party may also want to have a pool of 
money  that  its  members  can  use  to  buy  things  that  
benefit  the  whole  group,  such  as  potions  of  healing  or  
holy water. 
Amassing  Wealth:  When  you  and  your  friends  
have   split   up   the   treasure   among   the   characters,   
record your character’s share on your character sheet. 
Soon,  he  or  she  will  have  enough  gold  to  buy  better  
weapons and equipment, even magic items. 
 
OTHER REWARDS 
The   other   rewards   that   characters   can   
earn,  and  there  are  many,  depend  more  
on  the  characters’  actions  and  the  style  
of  campaign  that  the  DM  is  running.  
They  bear  mention,  but  the  rules  cannot  
define  them.  These  rewards  develop  natu-
rally in the campaign. 
 
REPUTATION 
You  can’t  put  it  in  the  bank,  but  many  
characters  enjoy  and  even  pursue  fame  
and   notoriety.   Someone   who   seeks   a   
reputation    should    wear    distinctive    
clothes  or  armor,  should  treat  bards  
well,   and   might   even   want   to   
invent a personal symbol for signet 
rings,  surcoats,  banners,  and  other  
forms of display. 
 
FOLLOWERS 
When  others  hear  of  the  characters,  they  may  
offer  their  services  as  followers.  Followers  may  
be  apprentices,  admirers,  henchmen,  students,  
or sidekicks. 
 
LAND 
A  character  (or  a  party)  might  gain  land  through  
force  of  arms  or  be  granted  a  tract  of  land  by  a  
powerful figure. Land brings in revenue appropriate 
to  its  type  (such  as  taxes  on  harvests  in  arable  land),  
and  it  provides  a  place  for  a  character  (or  party)  to  
build a stronghold of some kind. In addition to being a 
base   and   a   safe   place,   a   stronghold   can   serve   as   a   
church,  a  monastery,  a  wizards’  school,  or  fulfil  some  
other purpose, as the master of the stronghold wishes. 
 
TITLES AND HONORS 
High    priests,    nobles,    and    royals    often    
acknowledge    the    services    of    powerful    
characters   by   granting   them   honors   and   
titles. These awards are sometimes handed out along 
with  gifts  of  gold  or  land,  memberships  in  elite  orders,  or  
medals, signet rings, diadems, and other symbolic items. 
Illus. by S. Wood 
Gold piece 
[exact size] 
CHAPTER 9: 
ADVENTURING
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
efore  setting  out  on  a  dangerous  journey  with  her  com-
panions,  Mialee  sits  in  her  study  and  opens  her  spellbook.  
First  she  pages  through  it,  selecting  the  spells  that  she  
thinks will be most useful on her adventure. When she has 
chosen  the  spells  she  wants  (which  could  mean  choosing  
the  same  spell  more  than  once),  she  meditates  on  the  pages  that  
describe  each  one.  The  arcane  symbols,  which  she  has  penned  by  
hand,  would  be  nonsense  to  anyone  else,  but  they  unlock  power  
from her mind. As she concentrates, she all but finishes casting each 
spell  that  she  prepares.  Each  spell  now  lacks  only  its  final  trigger.  
When  she  closes  the  book,  her  mind  is  full  of  spells,  each  of  which  
she can complete at will in a brief time. 
A  spell  is  a  one-time  magical  effect.  Spells  come  in  two  types:  
arcane  (cat  by  bards,  sorcerers,  and  wizards)  and  divine  (cast  by  
clerics,   druids,   and   experienced   paladins   and   rangers).   Some   
spellcasters  select  their  spells  from  a  limited  list  of  spells  known,  
while  others  have  access  to  a  wide  variety  of  options.  Most  spell-
casters  prepare  their  spells  in  advance—whether  from  a  spellbook  
or  through  devout  prayers  and  meditation—while  some  cast  spells  
spontaneously  without  preparation.  Despite  these  different  ways  
that characters use to learn or prepare their spells, when it comes to 
casting them, the spells are very much alike. 
Cutting  across  the  categories  of  arcane  and  divine  spells  are  the  
eight  schools  of  magic.  These  schools  represent  the  different  ways  
that   spells   take   effect.   This   chapter   describes   the   differences   
between  the  eight  schools  of  magic.  In  addition,  it  provides  an  
overview  of  the  spell  description  format,  an  extensive  discussion  of  
how  spells  work,  information  about  what  happens  when  magical  
effects  combine,  and  an  explanation  of  the  differences  between  the  
kinds of special abilities, some of which are magical. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CASTING SPELLS 
Whether  a  spell  is  arcane  or  divine,  and  whether  a  character  
prepares spells in advance or chooses them on the spot, casting a 
spell works the same way. 
 
HOW DOES SPELLCASTING WORK? 
Spells operate in different ways depending on the type of spell 
you’re casting. Here are three basic examples. 
Charm    Person:    Tordek    is    bullying    some    goblins    into    
revealing  the  whereabouts  of  their  camp  when  Mialee  casts  
charm  person  on  one  of  them.  The  DM  rolls  a  Will  saving  
throw  for  the  goblin  against  Mialee’s  save  DC  of  13  for  her  
1st-level spells, and the save fails. Mialee is a 1st-level wizard, 
so for the next hour the goblin regards her as his friend, and 
she gets the information out of him. 
Summon  Monster  I:  Lidda  is  fighting  a  hobgoblin,  and  
Mialee  casts  summon  monster  I  to  conjure  a  celestial  dog.  
She  can  have  the  dog  materialize  in  any  location  that  she  
can  see  within  25  feet.  She  chooses  to  have  it  materialize  
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  hobgoblin  from  Lidda.  One  
round later, when Mialee is finished casting the spell, the 
dog  appears.  It  attacks  immediately  and  gets  a  +2  bonus  
on its attack roll because it is flanking the hobgoblin. On 
Lidda’s  next  turn,  she  makes  a  sneak  attack  against  the  
hobgoblin  and  kills  it.  The  dog  disappears  at  the  start  of  
Mialee’s  next  turn  because  summon  monster  I  lasts  only  1  
round for a 1st-level caster. 
Burning  Hands:  Mialee  wants  to  cast  burning  hands  on  
some  Small  centipedes,  and  she  wants  to  hit  as  many  of  
169

 
 
170 
them  as  she  can.  She  moves  to  a  spot  that  puts  three  centipedes  
within  15  feet  of  her,  but  none  next  to  her,  so  they  can’t  attack  her  
while  she  is  casting  casting.  She  chooses  a  direction  and  casts  her  
spell. A cone of magical flame shoots out 15 feet, catching the three 
centipedes  in  its  area.  Mialee’s  player  rolls  1d4  to  see  how  much  
damage each centipede takes and gets a result of 3. The DM makes a 
Reflex  save  (DC  13  for  one  of  Mialee’s  1st-level  spells)  for  each  
centipede,  and  only  one  succeeds.  Two  centipedes  take  3  points  of  
damage  each  and  drop.  The  lucky  one  takes  half  damage  (1  point)  
and survives. 
Casting  a  spell  can  be  a  straightforward  process,  such  as  when  
Jozan  casts  cure  light  wounds  to  remove  some  of  the  damage  that  
Tordek  has  taken,  or  it  can  be  complicated,  such  as  when  Jozan  is  
attempting to aim an insect plague by ear at a group of nagas who have 
hidden  themselves  in  a  deeper  darkness  spell,  all  the  while  avoiding  
the attacks of the nagas’ troglodyte servants. 
 
CHOOSING A SPELL 
First  you  must  choose  which  spell  to  cast.  If  you’re  a  cleric,  druid,  
experienced  paladin,  experienced  ranger,  or  wizard,  you  select  from  
among spells prepared earlier in the day and not yet cast (see Prepar-
ing Wizard Spells, page 177, and Preparing Divine Spells, page 179). 
If  you’re  a  bard  or  sorcerer,  you  can  select  any  spell  you  know,  pro-
vided you are capable of casting spells of that level or higher. 
To cast a spell, you must be able to speak (if the spell has a verbal 
component),  gesture  (if  it  has  a  somatic  component),  and  manipu-
late  the  material  components  or  focus  (if  any).  Additionally,  you  
must concentrate to cast a spell—and it’s hard to concentrate in the 
head of battle. (See below for details.) 
If  a  spell  has  multiple  versions,  you  choose  which  version  to  use  
when you cast it. You don’t have to prepare (or learn, in the case of a 
bard  or  sorcerer)  a  specific  version  of  the  spell.  For  example,  resist 
energy  protects  a  creature  from  fire,  cold,  or  other  energy  types.  You  
choose when you cast the spell which energy type it will protect the 
subject from. 
Once you’ve cast a prepared spell, you can’t cast it again until you 
prepare it again. (If you’ve prepared multiple copies of a single spell, 
you  can  cast  each  copy  once.)  If  you’re  a  bard  or  sorcerer,  casting  a  
spell counts against your daily limit for spells of that spell level, but 
you can cast the same spell again if you haven’t reached your limit. 
 
CONCENTRATION 
To  cast  a  spell,  you  must  concentrate.  If  something  interrupts  your  
concentration while you’re casting, you must make a Concentration 
check  or  lose  the  spell.  The  more  distracting  the  interruption  and  
the higher the level of the spell you are trying to cast, the higher the 
DC  is  (More  powerful  spells  require  more  mental  effort.)  If  you  fail  
the check, you lose the spell just as if you had cast it to no effect. 
Injury:  Getting  hurt  or  being  affected  by  hostile  magic  while  
trying to cast a spell can break your concentration and ruin the spell. 
If  while  trying  to  cast  a  spell  you  take  damage,  you  must  make  a  
Concentration check (DC 10 + points of damage taken + the level of 
the  spell  you’re  casting).  If  you  fail  the  check,  you  lose  the  spell  
without  effect.  The  interrupting  event  strikes  during  spellcasting  if  
it comes between when you start and when you complete a spell (for 
a  spell  with  a  casting  time  of  1  full  round  or  more)  or  if  it  comes  in  
response  to  your  casting  the  spell  (such  as  an  attack  of  opportunity  
provoked  by  the  spell  or  a  contingent  attack,  such  as  a  readied  
action). 
If  you  are  taking  continuous  damage,  such  as  from  Melf’s  acid  
arrow,  half  the  damage  is  considered  to  take  place  while  you  are  
casting a spell. You must make a Concentration check (DC 10 + 1/2 
the  damage  that  the  continuous  source  last  dealt  +  the  level  of  the  
spell  you’re  casting).  If  the  last  damage  dealt  was  the  last  damage  
that  the  effect  could  deal  (such  as  the  last  round  of  a  Melf’s  acid  
arrow),   then   the   damage   is   over,   and   it   does   not   distract   you.   
Repeated  damage,  such  as  from  a  spiritual weapon, does not count as 
continuous damage. 
Spell: If you are affected by a spell while attempting to cast a spell 
of your own, you must make a Concentration check or lose the spell 
you are casting. If the spell affecting you deals damage, the DC is 10 
+ points of damage + the level of the spell you’re casting. If the spell 
interferes with you or distracts you in some other way, the DC is the 
spell’s  saving  throw  DC  +  the  level  of  the  spell  you’re  casting.  For  a  
spell  with  no  saving  throw,  it’s  the  DC  that  the  spell’s  saving  throw  
would have if a save were allowed. 
Grappling  or  Pinned:  The  only  spells  you  can  cast  while  grap-
pling  or  pinned  are  those  without  somatic  components  and  whose  
material  components  (if  any)  you  have  in  hand.  Even  so,  you  must  
make  a  Concentration  check  (DC  20  +  the  level  of  the  spell  you’re  
casting) or lose the spell. 
Vigorous Motion: If you are riding on a moving mount, taking a 
bouncy ride in a wagon, on a small boat in rough water, below-decks 
in  a  storm-tossed  ship,  or  simply  being  jostled  in  a  similar  fashion,  
you must make a Concentration check (DC 10 + the level of the spell 
you’re casting) or lose the spell. 
Violent  Motion:  If  you  are  on  a  galloping  horse,  taking  a  very  
rough  ride  in  a  wagon,  on  a  small  boat  in  rapids  or  in  a  storm,  on  
deck  in  a  storm-tossed  ship,  or  being  tossed  roughly  about  in  a  
similar fashion, you must make a Concentration check (DC 15 + the 
level of the spell you’re casting) or lose the spell. 
Violent  Weather:  You  must  make  a  Concentration  check  if  you  
try  to  cast  a  spell  in  violent  weather.  If  you  are  in  a  high  wind  
carrying  blinding  rain  or  sleet,  the  DC  is  5  +  the  level  of  the  spell  
you’re casting. If you are in wind-driven hail, dust, or debris, the DC 
is  10  +  the  level  of  the  spell  you’re  casting.  In  either  case,  you  lose  
the spell if you fail the Concentration check. If the weather is caused 
by a spell, use the rules in the Spell subsection above. 
Casting  Defensively:  If  you  want  to  cast  a  spell  without  pro-
voking  any  attacks  of  opportunity,  you  need  to  dodge  and  weave.  
You  must  make  a  Concentration  check  (DC  15  +  the  level  of  the  
spell you’re casting) to succeed. You lose the spell if you fail. 
Entangled: If you want to cast a spell while entangled in a net or 
by a tanglefoot bag (page 128) or while you’re affected by a spell with 
similar  effects  (such  as  entangle),  you  must  make  a  DC  15  Concen-
tration check to cast the spell. You lose the spell if you fail. 
 
COUNTERSPELLS 
It is possible to cast any spell as a counterspell. By doing so, you are 
using  the  spell’s  energy  to  disrupt  the  casting  of  the  same  spell  by  
another character. Counterspelling works even if one spell is divine 
and the other arcane. 
How  Counterspells  Work:  To  use  a  counterspell,  you  must  
select  an  opponent  as  the  target  of  the  counterspell.  You  do  this  by  
choosing  the  ready  action  (page  160).  In  doing  so,  you  elect  to  wait  
to  complete  your  action  until  your  opponent  tries  to  cast  a  spell.  
(You may still move your speed, since ready is a standard action.) 
If  the  target  of  your  counterspell  tries  to  cast  a  spell,  make  a  
Spellcraft  check  (DC  15  +  the  spell’s  level).  This  check  is  a  free  
action.  If  the  check  succeeds,  you  correctly  identify  the  opponent’s  
spell  and  can  attempt  to  counter  it.  If  the  check  fails,  you  can’t  do  
either of these things. 
To complete the action, you must then cast the correct spell. As a 
general  rule,  a  spell  can  only  counter  itself.  For  example,  a  fireball 
spell  is  effective  as  a  counter  to  another  fireball  spell,  but  not  to  any  
other  spell,  no  matter  how  similar.  Fireball  cannot  counter  delayed 
blast  fireball or vice versa. If you are able to cast the same spell and 
you  have  it  prepared  (if  you  prepare  spells),  you  cast  it,  altering  it  
slightly  to  create  a  counterspell  effect.  If  the  target  is  within  range,  
both spells automatically negate each other with no other results. 
Counterspelling  Metamagic  Spells:  Metamagic  feats  are  not  
taken   into   account   when   determining   whether   a   spell   can   be   
countered.  For  example,  a  normal  fireball  can  counter  a  maximized  