CHAPTER 1: 
ABILITIES
 

 
 
9
 Balance,  Escape  Artist,  Hide,  Move  Silently,  Open  Lock,  Ride,  
Sleight  of  Hand,  Tumble,  and  Use  Rope  checks.  These  are  the  
skills that have Dexterity as their key ability. 
 
Average Dexterity Scores 
                                                                      Average                                                                      Average                                                                      
Example Race or Creature Kind Dexterity Modifier 
Shrieker (fungus) — — 
Gelatinous cube (ooze) 1 –5 
Colossal animated object 4–5 –3 
Purple worm, ogre zombie 6–7 –2 
Ogre, basilisk, fire giant, tendriculos 8–9 –1 
Human, triton, boar, giant fire beetle 10–11 +0 
Bugbear, lammasu, hobgoblin 12–13 +1 
Displacer beast, hieracosphinx 14–15 +2 
Blink dog, wraith, lion, octopus 16–17 +3 
Astral deva (angel), ethereal filcher 18–19 +4 
Arrowhawk, bone devil 20–21 +5 
Elder air elemental 32–33 +11
 
 
CONSTITUTION (CON) 
Constitution   represents   your   character’s   health   and   stamina.   A   
Constitution bonus increases a character’s hit points, so the ability is 
important for all classes. 
You apply your character’s Constitution modifier to: 
 Each  roll  of  a  Hit  Die  (though  a  penalty  can  never  drop  a  result  
below 1—that is, a character always gains at least 1 hit point each 
time he or she advances in level). 
 Fortitude saving throws, for resisting poison and similar threats. 
 Concentration  checks.  This  is  a  skill,  important  to  spellcasters,  
that has Constitution as its key ability. 
If  a  character’s  Constitution  score  changes  enough  to  alter  his  or  
her Constitution modifier, the character’s hit points also increase or 
decrease accordingly. 
 
Average Constitution Scores 
                                                                      Average                                                                      Average                                                                      
Example Race or Creature Kind Constitution Modifier 
Ghoul, mummy, shadow — — 
Centipede swarm, locust swarm 8–9 –1 
Human, imp, dire weasel, grick 10–11 +0 
Rust monster, medusa, otyugh, nymph 12–13 +1 
Light horse, merfolk, troglodyte 14–15 +2 
Tiger, chimera, assassin vine 16–17 +3 
Polar bear, gargoyle, umber hulk 18–19 +4 
Elephant, aboleth, tyrannosaurus 20–21 +5 
The tarrasque 35 +12 
 
INTELLIGENCE (INT) 
Intelligence determines how well your character learns and reasons. 
This  ability  is  important  for  wizards  because  it  affects  how  many  
spells  they  can  cast,  how  hard  their  spells  are  to  resist,  and  how  
powerful  their  spells  can  be.  It’s  also  important  for  any  character  
who wants to have a wide  assortment of skills. 
You apply your character’s Intelligence modifier to: 
 The number of languages your character knows at the start of the 
game. 
 The number of skill points gained each level. (But your character 
always gets at least 1 skill point per level.) 
 Appraise,    Craft,    Decipher    Script,    Disable    Device,    Forgery,    
Knowledge,  Search,  and  Spellcraft  checks.  These  are  the  skills  
that have Intelligence as their key ability. 
A  wizard  gains  bonus  spells  based  on  her  Intelligence  score.  The  
minimum Intelligence score needed to cast a wizard spell is 10 + the 
spell’s level. 
An  animal  has  an  Intelligence  score  of  1  or  2.  A  creature  of  hu-
manlike intelligence has scores of at least 3. 
Average Intelligence Scores 
                                                                      Average                                                                      Average                                                                      
Example Race or Creature Kind Intelligence Modifier 
Zombie, golem, ochre jelly — — 
Carrion crawler, purple worm, camel 1 –5 
Tiger, hydra, dog, horse 2 –4 
Gray render, tendriculos, rast 3 –4 
Otyugh, griffon, displacer beast 4–5 –3 
Troll, hell hound, ogre, yrthak 6–7 –2 
Troglodyte, centaur, gnoll 8–9 –1 
Human, bugbear, wight, night hag 10–11 +0 
Dragon turtle, cloud giant, lamia 12–13 +1 
Invisible stalker, wraith, will-o’-wisp 14–15 +2 
Beholder, succubus, trumpet archon 16–17 +3 
Mind flayer, death slaad, nightwing 18–19 +4 
Kraken, titan, nightcrawler 20–21 +5 
Great wyrm gold dragon 32–33 +11
 
 
WISDOM (WIS) 
Wisdom   describes   a   character’s   willpower,   common   sense,   per-
ception, and intuition. While Intelligence represents one’s ability to 
analyze  information,  Wisdom  represents  being  in  tune  with  and  
aware  of  one’s  surroundings.  An  “absentminded  professor”  has  low  
Wisdom   and   high   Intelligence.   A   simpleton   (low   Intelligence)   
might  still  have  great  insight  (high  Wisdom).  Wisdom  is  the  most  
important  ability  for  clerics  and  druids,  and  it  is  also  important  for  
paladins  and  rangers.  If  you  want  your  character  to  have  acute  
senses,  put  a  high  score  in  Wisdom.  Every  creature  has  a  Wisdom  
score. 
You apply your character’s Wisdom modifier to: 
 Will  saving  throws  (for  negating  the  effect  of  charm  person  and  
other spells). 
 Heal, Listen, Profession, Sense Motive, Spot, and Survival checks. 
These are the skills that have Wisdom as their key ability. 
Clerics,  druids,  paladins,  and  rangers  get  bonus  spells  based  on  
their Wisdom scores. The minimum Wisdom score needed to cast a 
cleric, druid, paladin, or ranger spell is 10 + the spell’s level. 
 
Average Wisdom Scores 
                                                                      Average                                                                      Average                                                                      
Example Race or Creature Kind Wisdom Modifier 
Gelatinous cube (ooze), animated object 1 –5 
Shrieker (fungus) 2 –4 
Red slaad, githyanki 6–7 –2 
Purple worm, grimlock, troll 8–9 –1 
Human, lizardfolk, phantom fungus 10–11 +0 
Owlbear, hyena, shadow, remorhaz 12–13 +1 
Wraith, owl, giant praying mantis 14–15 +2 
Devourer, lillend, androsphinx 16–17 +3 
Couatl, erinyes devil, guardian naga 18–19 +4 
Unicorn, storm giant 20–21 +5 
Great wyrm gold dragon 32–33 +11 
 
CHARISMA (CHA) 
Charisma measures a character’s force of personality, persuasiveness, 
personal magnetism, ability to lead, and physical attractiveness. This 
ability represents actual strength of personality, not merely how one 
is perceived by others in a social setting. Charisma is most important 
for  paladins,  sorcerers,  and  bards.  It  is  also  important  for  clerics,  
since  it  affects  their  ability  to  turn  undead.  Every  creature  has  a  
Charisma score. 
You apply your character’s Charisma modifier to: 
 Bluff,  Diplomacy,  Disguise,  Gather  Information,  Handle  Animal,  
Intimidate, Perform, and Use Magic Device checks. These are the 
skills that have Charisma as their key ability. 
 Checks that represent an attempt to influence others. 
CHAPTER 1: 
ABILITIES
 

 
 
10 
 Turning   checks   for   clerics   and   paladins   attempting   to   turn   
zombies, vampires, and other undead. 
Sorcerers  and  bards  get  bonus  spells  based  on  their  Charisma  
scores.  The  minimum  Charisma  score  needed  to  cast  a  sorcerer  or  
bard spell is 10 + the spell’s level. 
 
Average Charisma Scores 
                                                                      Average                                                                      Average                                                                      
Example Race or Creature Kind Wisdom Modifier 
Zombie, golem, shrieker (fungus) 1 –5 
Spider, crocodile, lizard, rhinoceros 2 –4 
Tendriculos, octopus 3 –4 
Dire rat, weasel, chuul, donkey 4–5 –3 
Badger, troll, giant fire beetle, bear 6–7 –2 
Gnoll, dire boar, manticore, gorgon 8–9 –1 
Human, wolverine, dretch (demon) 10–11 +0 
Treant, roper, doppelganger, night hag 12–13 +1 
Storm giant, barghest, medusa 14–15 +2 
Ogre mage, pixie, harpy, achaierai 16–17 +3 
Greater barghest, nixie 18–19 +4 
Astral deva (angel), kraken 20–21 +5 
Great wyrm gold dragon 32–33 +11 
 
EXAMPLE OF GENERATING AND 
ASSIGNING ABILITY SCORES 
Monte  wants  to  create  a  new  character.  He  rolls  four  six-sided  dice  
(4d6)  and  gets  5,  4,  4,  and  1.  Ignoring  the  lowest  roll  (1),  he  records  
the result on scratch paper: 13. He rolls the dice five more times and 
gets these six scores: 13, 10, 15, 12, 8, and 14. Monte decides to play a 
strong, tough dwarf fighter. Now he assigns his scores to abilities. 
Strength   gets   the   highest   score,   15.   His   character   has   a   +2   
Strength bonus that will serve him well in combat. 
Constitution gets the next highest score, 14. The dwarf’s +2 racial 
bonus  to  Constitution  (see  Table  2–1:  Racial  Ability  Adjustments,  
page 12) improves his Constitution score to 16, which gives him a +3 
modifier.  This  bonus  gives  the  character  more  hit  points  and  better  
Fortitude saving throws. 
Monte  puts  his  lowest  score,  8,  into  Charisma.  The  dwarf’s  –2  
racial  penalty  to  Charisma  (see  Table  2–1)  reduces  his  Charisma  
score to 6, for a –2 penalty. 
Monte  has  two  bonus-range  scores  left  (13  and  12),  plus  an  aver-
age  score  (10).  Dexterity  gets  the  13  (+1  bonus),  which  helps  with  
ranged weapon attacks and with Reflex saving throws. (Monte’s also 
thinking  ahead.  A  Dexterity  score  of  13  qualifies  his  character  for  
the Dodge feat—see Table 5–1: Feats, page 90). 
Wisdom  gets  the  12  (+1  bonus).  The  Wisdom  bonus  helps  with  
perception skills, such as Spot and Listen (see Table 4–2: Skills, page 
63), as well as with Will saving throws. 
Intelligence  gets  the  10  (no  bonus  or  penalty).  An  average  Intel-
ligence isn’t bad for a fighter. 
Monte records his character’s race, class, ability scores, and ability 
modifiers on his character sheet. 
 
CHANGING ABILITY SCORES 
Over  time,  the  ability  scores  your  character  starts  with  can  change.  
Ability  scores  can  increase  with  no  limit.  Points  at  which  ability  
changes occur include the following: 
 Add  1  point  to  any  score  upon  attaining  4th  level  and  at  every  
fourth level your character attains thereafter (8th, 12th, 16th, and 
20th level). 
 Many  spells  and  magical  effects  temporarily  increase  or  decrease  
ability  scores.  The  ray  of  enfeeblement  spell  reduces  a  creature’s  
Strength,  and  the  bull’s  strength  spell  increases  it.  Sometimes  a  
spell simply hampers a character, reducing his or her ability score. 
A character trapped by an entangle spell, for example, acts as if his 
or her Dexterity were 4 points lower than it really is. 
 Several magic items improve ability scores as long as the character 
is using them. For example, gloves of dexterity improve the wearer’s 
Dexterity   score.   (Magic   items   are   described   in   the   Dungeon 
Master’s Guide.) Note that a magic item of this type can’t change an 
ability score by more than +6. 
 Some rare magic items can boost an ability score permanently, as 
can a wish spell. Such an increase is called an inherent bonus. An 
ability score can’t have an inherent bonus of more than +5. 
 Poisons,   diseases,   and   other   effects   can   temporarily   harm   an   
ability  (ability  damage).  Ability  points  lost  to  damage  return  on  
their own at a rate of 1 point per day for each damaged ability. 
 Some  effects  drain  abilities,  resulting  in  a  permanent  loss  (ability  
drain). Points lost this way don’t return on their own, but they can 
be regained with spells, such as restoration. 
 As a character ages, some ability scores go up and others go down. 
See Table 6–5: Aging Effects (page 109). 
When  an  ability  score  changes,  all  attributes  associated  with  that  
score change accordingly. For example, when Mialee becomes a 4th-
level  wizard,  she  decides  to  increase  her  Intelligence  score  to  16.  
That  score  gives  her  a  3rd-level  bonus  spell  (which  she’ll  pick  up  
upon  attaining  5th  level,  when  she  becomes  able  to  cast  3rd-level  
spells), and it increases the number of skill points she gets per level 
from  4  to  5  (2  per  level  for  her  class,  plus  another  3  per  level  from  
her  Intelligence  bonus).  As  a  new  4th-level  character,  she  can  get  
the  skill  points  immediately  after  raising  her  Intelligence,  so  she’ll  
get  5  points  for  attaining  4th  level  in  the  wizard  class.  She  does  not  
retroactively  get  additional  points  for  her  previous  levels  (that  is,  
skill  points  she  would  have  gained  if  she  had  had  an  Intelligence  
score of 16 starting at 1st level). 
INTELLIGENCE, WISDOM, AND CHARISMA 
You can use your character’s Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores
to  guide  you  in  roleplaying  your  character.  Here  is  some  background
(just guidelines) about what these scores can mean. 
A smart character (one with high Intelligence) is curious, knowledge-
able, and prone to using big words. A character with a high Intelligence
but low Wisdom may be smart but absentminded, or knowledgeable but
lacking in common sense. A character with a high Intelligence but a low
Charisma  may  be  a  know-it-all  or  a  reclusive  scholar.  A  smart  character
lacking  in  both  Wisdom  and  Charisma  may  put  her  foot  in  her  mouth
often. 
A  character  with  a  low  Intelligence  mispronounces  and  misuses
words, has trouble following directions, or fails to get the joke. 
A  character  with  a  high  Wisdom  score  may  be  sensible,  serene,  “in
tune,”  alert,  or  centered.  A  character  with  a  high  Wisdom  but  low  
Intelligence may be aware, but simple. A character with high Wisdom but 
low  Charisma  knows  enough  to  speak  carefully  and  may  become  an  
advisor  (or  “power  behind  the  throne”)  rather  than  a  leader.  The  wise  
character lacking in both Intelligence and Charisma is uncouth and unso-
phisticated. 
A  character  with  a  low  Wisdom  score  may  be  rash,  imprudent,  irre-
sponsible, or “out of it.” 
A character with high Charisma may be attractive, striking, personable, 
and confident. A character with high Charisma but a low Intelligence can 
usually pass herself off as knowledgeable, until she meets a true expert. 
A charismatic character lacking in both Intelligence and Wisdom is likely 
to be shallow and unaware of others’ feelings. 
A character with low Charisma may be reserved, gruff, rude, fawning, 
or simply nondescript. 
CHAPTER 1: 
ABILITIES
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he  elven  woods  are  home  to  the  elves  and  their  allies.  
Not many dwarves or half-orcs live there. In turn, elves, 
humans,   halflings,   and   half-orcs   are   hard   to   find   in   
underground  dwarven  cities.  And  while  nonhumans  may  
travel  through  the  human  countryside,  most  country  folk  
are  humans.  In  the  big  cities,  however,  the  promise  of  power  and  
profit  brings  together  people  of  all  the  common  races:  humans,  
dwarves, elves, gnomes, half-elves, half-orcs, and halflings. 
 
CHOOSING A RACE 
After you roll your ability scores and before you write them on your 
character  sheet,  choose  your  character’s  race.  At  the  same  time,  you  
should choose a class, since race affects how well a character can do 
in each class. Once you know your character’s race and class, assign 
your  ability  score  rolls  to  particular  abilities,  alter  those  abilities  
according to race, and continue detailing your character. 
You  can  play  a  character  of  any  race  and  class  combination,  but  
certain   races   do   better   pursuing   certain   careers.   Halflings,   for   
example,  can  be  fighters,  but  their  small  size  and  special  features  
make them better as rogues. 
Your  character’s  race  gives  you  plenty  of  cues  as  to  what  sort  of  
person  he  or  she  is,  how  he  or  she  feels  about  characters  of  other  
races,  and  what  his  or  her  motivations  might  be.  Remember,  how-
ever, that these descriptions apply only to the majority of each race’s 
members.  In  each  race,  some  individuals  diverge  from  the  norm,  
and your character could be one of these. Don’t let a description of a 
race keep you from detailing your character as you like. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Your character’s race determines some of his or her qualities. 
 
ABILITY ADJUSTMENTS 
Find   your   character’s   race   on   Table   2–1:   Racial   Ability   
Adjustments (see the next page) and apply the adjustments you 
see there to your character’s ability scores. If these changes put 
your  score  above  18  or  below  3,  that’s  okay,  except  in  the  case  
of  Intelligence,  which  does  not  go  below  3  for  characters.  (If  
your half-orc character would have an adjusted Intelligence of 
1 or 2, make it 3 instead.) 
For example, Lidda, a halfling, gets a +2 racial bonus on her 
Dexterity score and a –2 racial penalty on her Strength score. 
Knowing  this,  her  player  puts  her  best  score  rolled  (15)  in  
Dexterity  so  that  it  will  increase  to  17.  She  doesn’t  want  a  
Strength penalty, so she puts an above-average score (12) in 
Strength.  Her  Strength  score  drops  to  10,  which  carries  
neither a bonus nor a penalty. 
 
FAVORED CLASS 
Each race’s favored class is also given on Table 2–1: Racial 
Ability  Adjustments.  A  character’s  favored  class  doesn’t  
count  against  him  or  her  when  determining  experience  
point  penalties  for  multiclassing  (see  XP  for  Multiclass  
Characters, page 60). 
For  example,  as  a  halfling  rogue,  Lidda  can  add  a  second  
class  later  on  (becoming  a  multiclass  character)  without  
worrying  about  an  XP  penalty,  because  rogue  is  favored  
class for halflings. 
 
11

 
 
12 
Table 2–1: Racial Ability Adjustments 
Race Ability Adjustments Favored Class 
Human              None              Any              
Dwarf +2 Constitution, –2 Charisma Fighter 
Elf +2 Dexterity, –2 Constitution Wizard 
Gnome +2 Constitution, –2 Strength Bard 
Half-elf               None               Any               
Half-orc +2 Strength, –2 Intelligence
1
,                   Barbarian                   
                           –2                           Charisma                           
Halfling +2 Dexterity, –2 Strength Rogue 
1 A half-orc’s starting Intelligence score is always at least 3. If this 
adjustment would lower the character’s score to 1 or 2, his score is 
nevertheless 3.
 
 
RACE AND LANGUAGES 
In a big city, visitors can hear all manner of languages being spoken. 
Dwarves  haggle  over  gems  in  Dwarven,  elf  sages  engage  in  learned  
debates  in  Elven,  and  preachers  call  out  prayers  in  Celestial.  The  
language  heard  most,  however,  is  Common,  a  tongue  shared  by  all  
who take part in the culture at large. With all these languages in use, 
it  is  easy  for  people  to  learn  other  languages,  and  adventurers  often  
speak several tongues. 
All characters know how to speak Common. A dwarf, elf, gnome, 
half-elf,   half-orc,   or   halfling   also   speaks   a   racial   language,   as   
appropriate.  A  smart  character  (one  who  had  an  Intelligence  bonus  
at  1st  level)  speaks  other  languages  as  well,  one  extra  language  per  
point   of   Intelligence   bonus   as   a   starting   character.   Select   your   
character’s bonus languages (if any) from the list found in his or her 
race’s description later in this chapter. 
Literacy:  Any  character  except  a  barbarian  can  read  and  write  all  
the  languages  he  or  she  speaks.  (A  barbarian  can  become  literate  by  
spending skill points, see Illiteracy, page 25.) 
Class-Related   Languages:   Clerics,   druids,   and   wizards   can   
choose  certain  languages  as  bonus  languages  even  if  they’re  not  on  
the lists found in the race descriptions. These class-related languages 
are as follows: 
Cleric: Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal. 
Druid: Sylvan. 
Wizard: Draconic. 
 
HUMANS 
Most  humans  are  the  descendants  of  pioneers,  conquerors,  traders,  
travelers,   refugees,   and   other   people   on   the   move.   As   a   result,   
human  lands  are  home  to  a  mix  of  people—physically,  culturally,  
religiously,  and  politically  different.  Hardy  or  fine,  light-skinned  or  
dark,  showy  or  austere,  primitive  or  civilized,  devout  or  impious,  
humans run the gamut. 
Personality:  Humans  are  the  most  adaptable,  flexible,  and  ambi-
tious  people  among  the  common  races.  They  are  diverse  in  their  
tastes,  morals,  customs,  and  habits.  Others  accuse  them  of  having  
little respect for history, but it’s only natural that humans, with their 
relatively  short  life  spans  and  constantly  changing  cultures,  would  
have  a  shorter  collective  memory  than  dwarves,  elves,  gnomes,  or  
halflings. 
Physical  Description:  Humans  typically  stand  from  5  feet  to  a  
little  over  6  feet  tall  and  weigh  from  125  to  250  pounds,  with  men  
noticeably taller and heavier than women. Thanks to their penchant 
for migration and conquest, and to their short life spans, humans are 
more physically diverse than other common races. Their skin shades 
range  from  nearly  black  to  very  pale,  their  hair  from  black  to  blond  
(curly, kinky, or straight), and their facial hair (for men) from sparse 
to  thick.  Plenty  of  humans  have  a  dash  of  nonhuman  blood,  and  
they  may  demonstrate  hints  of  elf,  orc,  or  other  lineages.  Members  
of  this  race  are  often  ostentatious  or  unorthodox  in  their  grooming  
Illus. by T. Lockwood 