CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
89
FEAT DESCRIPTIONS 
Here is the format for feat descriptions. 
 
FEAT NAME [TYPE OF FEAT] 
Description of what the feat does or represents in plain language. 
Prerequisite:  A  minimum  ability  score,  another  feat  or  feats,  a  
minimum base attack bonus, a minimum number of ranks in one or 
more  skills,  or  a  class  level  that  a  character  must  have  in  order  to  
acquire  this  feat.  This  entry  is  absent  if  a  feat  has  no  prerequisite.  A  
feat may have more than one prerequisite. 
Benefit:  What  the  feat  enables  the  character  (“you”  in  the  feat  
description)  to  do.  If  a  character  has  the  same  feat  more  than  once,  
its  benefits  do  not  stack  unless  indicated  otherwise  in  the  descrip-
tion. In general, having a feat twice is the same as having it once. 
Normal:  What  a  character  who  does  not  have  this  feat  is  limited  
to   or   restricted   from   doing.   If   not   having   the   feat   causes   no   
particular drawback, this entry is absent. 
Special: Additional facts about the feat that may be helpful when 
you decide whether to acquire the feat. 
 
ACROBATIC [GENERAL] 
You have excellent body awareness and coordination. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Jump  checks  and  Tumble  
checks. 
 
AGILE [GENERAL] 
You are particularly flexible and poised. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Balance  checks  and  Escape  
Artist checks. 
 
ALERTNESS [GENERAL] 
You have finely tuned senses. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on all Listen checks and Spot checks. 
Special:  The  master  of  a  familiar  (see  the  Familiars  sidebar,  page  
52)  gains  the  benefit  of  the  Alertness  feat  whenever  the  familiar  is  
within arm’s reach. 
 
ANIMAL AFFINITY [GENERAL] 
You are good with animals. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Handle  Animal  checks  and  
Ride checks. 
 
ARMOR PROFICIENCY (HEAVY) [GENERAL] 
You  are  proficient  with  heavy  armor  (see  Table  7–6:  Armor  and  
Shields, page 123). 
Prerequisites:   Armor   Proficiency   (light),   Armor   Proficiency   
(medium). 
Benefit: See Armor Proficiency (light). 
Normal: See Armor Proficiency (light). 
Special:  Fighters,  paladins,  and  clerics  automatically  have  Armor  
Proficiency (heavy) as a bonus feat. They need not select it. 
 
ARMOR PROFICIENCY (LIGHT) [GENERAL] 
You  are  proficient  with  light  armor  (see  Table  7–6:  Armor  and  
Shields, page 123). 
Benefit:  When  you  wear  a  type  of  armor  with  which  you  are  
proficient,  the  armor  check  penalty  for  that  armor  applies  only  to  
Balance,  Climb,  Escape  Artist,  Hide,  Jump,  Move  Silently,  Pick  
Pocket, and Tumble checks. 
Normal: A character who is wearing armor with which she is not 
proficient  applies  its  armor  check  penalty  to  attack  rolls  and  to  all  
skill checks that involve moving, including Ride. 
Special:   All   characters   except   wizards,   sorcerers,   and   monks   
automatically  have  Armor  Proficiency  (light)  as  a  bonus  feat.  They  
need not select it. 
ARMOR PROFICIENCY (MEDIUM) 
[GENERAL] 
You  are  proficient  with  medium  armor  (see  Table  7–6:  Armor  and  
Shields, page 123). 
Prerequisite: Armor Proficiency (light). 
Benefit: See Armor Proficiency (light). 
Normal: See Armor Proficiency (light). 
Special:  Fighters,  barbarians,  paladins,  clerics,  druids,  and  bards  
automatically  have  Armor  Proficiency  (medium)  as  a  bonus  feat.  
They need not select it. 
 
ATHLETIC [GENERAL] 
You have a knack for athletic endeavors. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Climb  checks  and  Swim  
checks. 
 
AUGMENT SUMMONING [GENERAL] 
Your summoned creatures are more powerful than normal. 
Prerequisite: Spell Focus (conjuration). 
Benefit: Each creature you conjure with any summon spell gains a 
+4   enhancement   bonus   to   Strength   and   Constitution   for   the   
duration of the spell that summoned it. 
 
BLIND-FIGHT [GENERAL] 
You know how to fight in melee without being able to see your foes. 
Benefit:  In  melee,  every  time  you  miss  because  of  concealment,  
you can reroll your miss chance percentile roll one time to see if you 
actually hit (see Concealment, page 152). 
An  invisible  attacker  gets  no  advantages  related  to  hitting  you  in  
melee.  That  is,  you  don’t  lose  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  Armor  Class,  
and  the  attacker  doesn’t  get  the  usual  +2  bonus  for  being  invisible  
(see  Table  8–5:  Attack  Roll  Modifiers  and  Table  8–6:  Armor  Class  
Modifiers,  page  151).  The  invisible  attacker’s  bonuses  do  still  apply  
for ranged attacks, however. 
You  take  only  half  the  usual  penalty  to  speed  for  being  unable  to  
see.  Darkness  and  poor  visibility  in  general  reduces  your  speed  to  
three-quarters normal, instead of one-half (see Table 9–4: Hampered 
Movement, page 163). 
Normal:   Regular   attack   roll   modifiers   for   invisible   attackers   
trying  to  hit  you  (see  Table  8–5:  Attack  Roll  Modifiers,  page  151)  
apply,  and  you  lose  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC.  The  speed  reduc-
tion  for  darkness  and  poor  visibility  (see  Table  9–4:  Hampered  
Movement, page 163) also applies. 
Special: The Blind-Fight feat is of no use against a character who 
is the subject of a blink spell (see page 206). 
A  fighter  may  select  Blind-Fight  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  feats  
(see page 38). 
 
BREW POTION [ITEM CREATION] 
You  can  create  potions,  which  carry  spells  within  themselves.  See  
the Dungeon Master’s Guide for rules on potions. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 3rd. 
Benefit:  You  can  create  a  potion  of  any  3rd-level  or  lower  spell  
that  you  know  and  that  targets  one  or  more  creatures.  Brewing  a  
potion  takes  one  day.  When  you  create  a  potion,  you  set  the  caster  
level,  which  must  be  sufficient  to  cast  the  spell  in  question  and  no  
higher  than  your  own  level.  The  base  price  of  a  potion  is  its  spell  
level  ×    its  caster  level  ×    50  gp.  To  brew  a  potion,  you  must  spend  
1/25  of  this  base  price  in  XP  and  use  up  raw  materials  costing  one  
half this base price. 
When you create a potion, you make any choices that you would 
normally make when casting the spell. Whoever drinks the potion is 
the target of the spell. 
Any potion that stores a spell with a costly material component or 
an XP cost also carries a commensurate cost. In addition to the costs 
derived   from   the   base   price,   you   must   expend   the   material   
component or pay the XP when creating the potion. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
90 
  
Table 5–1: Feats 
General Feats Prerequisites Benefit 
Acrobatic — +2 bonus on Jump and Tumble checks 
Agile — +2 bonus on Balance and Escape Artist checks 
Alertness — +2 bonus on Listen and Spot checks 
Animal Affinity — +2 bonus on Handle Animal and Ride checks 
Armor Proficiency (light) — No armor check penalty on attack rolls 
Armor Proficiency (medium) Armor Proficiency (light) No armor check penalty on attack rolls 
Armor Proficiency (heavy) Armor Proficiency (medium) No armor check penalty on attack rolls 
Athletic — +2 bonus on Climb and Swim checks 
Augment Summoning Spell Focus (conjuration) Summoned creatures gain +4 Str, +4 Con 
Blind-Fight
1
 — Reroll miss chance for concealment 
Combat Casting — +4 bonus on Concentration checks for defensive casting 
Combat Expertise
1
 Int 13 Trade attack bonus for AC (max 5 points) 
Improved Disarm
1
 Combat Expertise +4 bonus on disarm attempts; no attack of opportunity 
Improved Feint
1
 Combat Expertise Feint in combat as move action 
Improved Trip
1
 Combat Expertise +4 bonus on trip attempts; no attack of opportunity 
Whirlwind Attack
1
 Dex 13, Combat Expertise, Dodge, Mobility, One melee attack against each opponent within reach 
 Spring Attack, base attack bonus +4 
Combat Reflexes
1
 — Additional attacks of opportunity 
Deceitful — +2 bonus on Disguise and Forgery checks 
Deft Hands — +2 bonus on Sleight of Hand and Use Rope checks 
Diligent — +2 bonus on Appraise and Decipher Script checks 
Dodge
1
 Dex 13 +1 dodge bonus to AC against selected target 
Mobility
1
 Dodge +4 dodge bonus to AC against some attacks of opportunity 
Spring Attack
1
 Mobility, base attack bonus +4 Move before and after melee attack 
Endurance — +4 bonus on checks or saves to resist nonlethal damage 
Diehard Endurance Remain conscious at –1 to –9 hp 
Eschew Materials — Cast spells without material components 
Exotic Weapon Proficiency
1, 2
 Base attack bonus +1 No penalty on attacks with specific exotic weapon 
Extra Turning
3
 Ability to turn or rebuke creatures Can turn or rebuke 4 more times per day 
Great Fortitude — +2 bonus on Fortitude saves 
Improved Counterspell — Counterspell with spell of same school 
Improved Critical
1, 2
 Proficient with weapon, base attack bonus +8 Double threat range of weapon 
Improved Initiative — +4 bonus on initiative checks 
Improved Turning Ability to turn or rebuke creatures +1 level for turning checks 
Improved Unarmed Strike
1
 — Considered armed even when unarmed 
Improved Grapple
1
 Dex 13, Improved Unarmed Strike +4 bonus on grapple checks; no attack of opportunity 
Deflect Arrows
1
 Dex 13, Improved Unarmed Strike Deflect one ranged attack per round 
Snatch Arrows
1
 Dex 15, Deflect Arrows, Catch a deflected ranged attack 
 Improved Unarmed Strike 
Stunning Fist
1
 Dex 13, Wis 13, Improved Unarmed Strike, Stun opponent with unarmed strike 
 base attack bonus +8 
Investigator — +2 bonus on Gather Information and Search checks 
Iron Will — +2 bonus on Will saves 
Leadership Character Level 6th Attract cohort and followers 
Lightning Reflexes — +2 bonus on Reflex saves 
Magical Aptitude — +2 bonus on Spellcraft and Use Magic Device checks 
Martial Weapon Proficiency
2
 — No penalty on attacks with specific martial weapon 
Mounted Combat
1
 Ride 1 rank Negate hits on mount with Ride check 
Mounted Archery
1
 Mounted Combat Half penalty for ranged attacks while mounted 
Ride-By Attack
1
 Mounted Combat Move before and after a mounted charge 
Spirited Charge
1
 Mounted Combat, Ride-By Attack Double damage with mounted charge 
Trample
1
 Mounted Combat Target cannot avoid mounted overrun 
Natural Spell Wis 13, Ability to use wild shape Cast spells while in wild shape 
Negotiator — +2 bonus on Diplomacy and Sense Motive checks 
Nimble Fingers — +2 bonus on Disable Device and Open Lock checks 
Persuasive — +2 bonus on Bluff checks and Intimidate checks 
Point Blank Shot
1
 — +1 bonus on ranged attack and damage within 30 ft. 
Far Shot
1
 Point Blank Shot Increase range increment by 50% or 100% 
Precise Shot
1
 Point Blank Shot No –4 penalty for shooting into melee 
Rapid Shot
1
 Dex 13, Point Blank Shot One extra ranged attack each round 
Manyshot
1
 Dex 17, Point Blank Shot, Rapid Shot, Shoot two or more arrows simultaneously 
 base attack bonus +6 
Shot on the Run
1
 Dex 13, Dodge, Mobility, Point Blank Shot, Move before and after ranged attack 
 base attack bonus +4 
Improved Precise Shot
1
 Dex 19, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Ignore less than total cover/concealment on ranged attack 
 base attack bonus +11 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
91
  
Power Attack
1
 Str 13 Trade attack bonus for damage (up to base attack bonus) 
Cleave
1
 Power Attack Extra melee attack after dropping target 
Great Cleave
1
 Cleave, Power Attack, base attack bonus +4 No limit to cleave attacks each round 
Improved Bull Rush
1
 Power Attack +4 bonus on bull rush attempts; no attack of opportunity 
Improved Overrun
1
 Power Attack +4 bonus on overrun attempts; no attack of opportunity 
Improved Sunder
1
 Power Attack +4 bonus on sunder attempts; no attack of opportunity 
Quick Draw
1
 Base attack bonus +1 Draw weapon as free weapon 
Rapid Reload
1
 Weapon Proficiency with crossbow Reload crossbow more quickly 
Run — Run 5 times normal speed, +4 bonus on Jump checks 
  Made after a running start 
Self-Sufficient — +2 bonus on Heal and Survival checks 
Shield Proficiency — No armor check penalty on attack rolls 
Improved Shield Bash
1
 Shield Proficiency Retain shield bonus to AC when shield bashing 
Tower Shield Proficiency Shield Proficiency No armor check penalty on attack rolls 
Simple Weapon Proficiency — No –4 penalty on attack rolls with simple weapons 
Skill Focus
2
 — +3 bonus on checks with selected skill 
Spell Focus
2
 — +1 bonus on save DCs against specific school of magic 
Greater Spell Focus
2
 — +1 bonus on save DCs against specific school of magic 
Spell Mastery
2
 Wizard level 1st Can prepare some spells without spellbook 
Spell Penetration — +2 bonus on caster level checks to defeat spell resistance 
Greater Spell Penetration Spell Penetration +4 to caster level checks to defeat spell resistance 
Stealthy — +2 bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks 
Toughness
3
 — +3 hit points 
Track — Use Survival skill to track 
Two-Weapon Fighting
1
 Dex 15 Reduce two-weapon fighting penalties by 2 
Two-Weapon Defense
1
 Two-Weapon Fighting Off-hand weapon grants +1 shield bonus to AC 
Improved Two-Weapon Fighting
1
    Dex 17, Two-Weapon Fighting, Gain second off-hand attack 
 base attack bonus +6 
Greater Two-Weapon Fighting Dex 19, Improved Two-Weapon Gain third off-hand attack 
 Fighting, Two-Weapon Fighting, 
 base attack bonus +11 
Weapon Finesse
1, 2
 Proficiency with weapon, Use Dex modifier instead of Str modifier on attack rolls 
 base attack bonus +1 with light melee weapons 
Weapon Focus
1, 2
 Proficiency with weapon, base attack bonus +1 +1 bonus on attack rolls with selected weapon 
Weapon Specialization
1, 2
 Proficiency with weapon, Weapon Focus +2 bonus on damage rolls with selected weapon 
 with weapon, fighter level 4th 
Greater Weapon Focus
1, 2
 Proficiency with weapon, Weapon Focus +2 bonus on attack rolls with selected weapon 
 with weapon, fighter level 8th 
Greater Weapon Specialization
1, 2
   Proficiency with weapon, Greater Weapon Focus +4 bonus on damage rolls with selected weapon 
 with weapon, Weapon Focus with weapon, 
 Weapon Specialization with weapon, fighter level 12th 
 
Item Creation Feats Prerequisites Benefit 
Brew Potion Spellcaster level 3rd Create magic potions 
Craft Magic Arms and Armor  Spellcaster level 5th Create magic weapons, armor, and shields 
Craft Rod  Spellcaster level 9th Create magic rods 
Craft Staff  Spellcaster level 12th Create magic staffs 
Craft Wand  Spellcaster level 5th Create magic wands 
Craft Wondrous Item  Spellcaster level 3rd Create magic wondrous items 
Forge Ring  Spellcaster level 12th Create magic rings 
Scribe Scroll  Spellcaster level 1st Create magic scrolls 
 
Metamagic Feats Prerequisites Benefit 
Empower Spell — Increase spell’s variable, numeric effects by 50% 
Enlarge Spell — Double spell’s range 
Extend Spell — Double spell’s duration 
Heighten Spell — Cast spells as higher level 
Maximize Spell — Maximize spell’s variable, numeric effects 
Quicken Spell — Cast spells as free action 
Silent Spell — Cast spells without verbal components 
Still Spell — Cast spells without somatic components 
Widen Spell — Double spell’s area 
 
1 A fighter may select this feat as one of his fighter bonus feats. 
2 You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new weapon, skill, school of magic, or 
selection of spells. 
3 You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects stack. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
92 
CLEAVE [GENERAL] 
You can follow through with powerful blows. 
Prerequisites: Str 13, Power Attack. 
Benefit: If you deal a creature enough damage to make it drop 
(typically  by  dropping  it  to  below  0  hit  points  or  killing  it),  you  get  
an  immediate,  extra  melee  attack  against  another  creature  within  
reach. You cannot take a 5-foot step before making this extra attack. 
The  extra  attack  is  with  the  same  weapon  and  at  the  same  bonus  as  
the  attack  that  dropped  the  previous  creature.  You  can  use  this  
ability once per round. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Cleave  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38). 
 
COMBAT CASTING [GENERAL] 
You are adept at casting spells in combat. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +4  bonus  on  Concentration  checks  made  to  
cast  a  spell  or  use  a  spell-like  ability  while  on  the  defensive  (see  
Casting  on  the  Defensive,  page  140)  or  while  you  are  grappling  or  
pinned. 
 
COMBAT EXPERTISE [GENERAL] 
You  are  trained  at  using  your  combat  skill  for  defense  as  well  as  
offense. 
Prerequisite: Int 13. 
Benefit: When you use the attack action or the full attack action 
in melee, you can take a penalty of as much as –5 on your attack roll 
and  add  the  same  number  (+5  or  less)  as  a  dodge  bonus  to  your  
Armor  Class.  This  number  may  not  exceed  your  base  attack  bonus.  
The  changes  to  attack  rolls  and  Armor  Class  last  until  your  next  
action. 
Normal: A character without the Combat Expertise feat can fight 
defensively  while  using  the  attack  or  full  attack  action  to  take  a  –4  
penalty on attack rolls and gain a +2 dodge bonus to Armor Class. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Combat  Expertise  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
COMBAT REFLEXES [GENERAL] 
You can respond quickly and repeatedly to opponents who let their 
defenses down. 
Benefit:  When  foes  leave  themselves  open,  you  may  make  a  
number of additional attacks of opportunity equal to your Dexterity 
bonus. For example, a fighter with a Dexterity of 15 can make a total 
of   three   attacks   of   opportunity   in   1   round—the   one   attack   of   
opportunity  any  character  is  entitled  to,  plus  two  more  because  of  
his  +2  Dexterity  bonus.  If  four  goblins  move  out  of  the  character’s  
threatened  squares,  he  can  make  one  attack  of  opportunity  each  
against  three  of  the  four.  You  can  still  make  only  one  attack  of  
opportunity per opportunity. 
With  this  feat,  you  may  also  make  attacks  of  opportunity  while  
flat-footed. 
Normal:  A  character  without  this  feat  can  make  only  one  attack  
of  opportunity  per  round  and  can’t  make  attacks  of  opportunity  
while flat-footed. 
Special:  The  Combat  Reflexes  feat  does  not  allow  a  rogue  to  use  
her opportunist ability (see page 51) more than once per round. 
A  fighter  may  select  Combat  Reflexes  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38) 
A monk may select Combat Reflexes as a bonus feat at 2nd level. 
 
CRAFT MAGIC ARMS AND ARMOR 
[ITEM CREATION] 
You can create magic weapons, armor, and shields. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 5th. 
Benefit:  You  can  create  any  magic  weapon,  armor,  or  shield  
whose  prerequisites  you  meet  (see  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  for  
prerequisites  and  other  information  on  these  items).  Enhancing  a  
weapon,  suit  of  armor,  or  shield  takes  one  day  for  each  1,000  gp  in  
the price of its magical features. To enhance a weapon, suit of armor, 
or  shield,  you  must  spend  1/25  of  its  features’  total  price  in  XP  and  
use up raw materials costing one-half of this total price. 
The  weapon,  armor,  or  shield  to  be  enhanced  must  be  a  mas-
terwork  item  that  you  provide.  Its  cost  is  not  included  in  the  above  
cost. 
You  can  also  mend  a  broken  magic  weapon,  suit  of  armor,  or  
shield  if  it  is  one  that  you  could  make.  Doing  so  costs  half  the  XP,  
half  the  raw  materials,  and  half  the  time  it  would  take  to  craft  that  
item in the first place. 
 
CRAFT ROD [ITEM CREATION] 
You can create magic rods, which have varied magical effects. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 9th. 
Benefit:  You  can  create  any  rod  whose  prerequisites  you  meet  
(see  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  for  prerequisites  and  other  infor-
mation on rods). Crafting a rod takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its 
base price. To craft a rod, you must spend 1/25 of its base price in XP 
and use up raw materials costing one-half of its base price. 
Some  rods  incur  extra  costs  in  material  components  or  XP,  as  
noted  in  their  descriptions.  These  costs  are  in  addition  to  those  
derived from the rod’s base price. 
 
CRAFT STAFF [ITEM CREATION] 
You can create magic staffs, each of which has mul-
tiple magical effects. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 12th. 
Benefit:  You  can  create  any  staff  
whose  prerequisites  you  meet  
(see     the     Dungeon     Master’s     
Guide   for   prerequisites   and   
other information on staffs). 
Crafting   a   staff   takes   
one  day  for  each  1,000  
gp  in  its  base  price.  To  
craft  a  staff,  you  must  spend  
1/25 of its base price in XP and 
use  up  raw  materials  costing  
one-half   of   its   base   price.   A   
newly    created    staff    
has 50 charges. 
Some    staffs    incur    
extra    costs    in    material    
components    or    XP,    as    
noted    in    their    descrip-
tions.   These   costs   are   in   
addition    to    those    derived    
from the staff ’s base price. 
 
CRAFT WAND [ITEM CREATION] 
You  can  create  wands,  which  hold  spells  (see  the  Dungeon  Master’s  
Guide for rules on wands). 
Prerequisite: Caster level 5th. 
Benefit: You can create a wand of any 4th-level or lower spell that 
you  know.  Crafting  a  wand  takes  one  day  for  each  1,000  gp  in  its  
base  price.  The  base  price  of  a  wand  is  its  caster  level  ×    the  spell  
level  ×  750  gp.  To  craft  a  wand,  you  must  spend  1/25  of  this  base  
price  in  XP  and  use  up  raw  materials  costing  one-half  of  this  base  
price. A newly created wand has 50 charges. 
Any wand that stores a spell with a costly material component or 
an XP cost also carries a commensurate cost. In addition to the cost 
derived  from  the  base  price,  you  must  expend  fifty  copies  of  the  
material component or pay fifty times the XP cost. 
 
CRAFT WONDROUS ITEM [ITEM CREATION] 
You can create a wide variety of magic items, such as a crystal ball or a 
flying carpet. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 3rd. 
Lidda dodges
the ray of a spell cas
t
by an evil cleric.
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
93
Benefit:  You  can  create  any  wondrous  item  whose  prerequisites  
you meet (see the Dungeon Master’s Guide for prerequisites and other 
information   on   wondrous   items).   Enchanting   a   wondrous   item   
takes  one  day  for  each  1,000  gp  in  its  price.  To  enchant  a  wondrous  
item, you must spend 1/25 of the item’s price in XP and use up raw 
materials costing half of this price. 
You  can  also  mend  a  broken  wondrous  item  if  it  is  one  that  you  
could  make.  Doing  so  costs  half  the  XP,  half  the  raw  materials,  and  
half the time it would take to craft that item in the first place. 
Some  wondrous  items  incur  extra  costs  in  material  components  
or  XP,  as  noted  in  their  descriptions.  These  costs  are  in  addition  to  
those derived from the item’s base price. You must pay such a cost to 
create an item or to mend a broken one. 
 
DECEITFUL [GENERAL] 
You have a knack for disguising the truth. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Disguise  checks  and  Forgery  
checks. 
 
DEFLECT ARROWS [GENERAL] 
You  can  deflect  incoming  arrows,  as  well  as  crossbow  bolts,  spears,  
and other projectile or thrown weapons. 
Prerequisites: Dex 13, Improved Unarmed Strike. 
Benefit:  You  must  have  at  least  one  hand  free  (holding  nothing)  
to  use  this  feat.  Once  per  round  when  you  would  normally  be  hit  
with a ranged weapon, you may deflect it so that you take no damage 
from   it.   You   must   be   aware   of   the   attack   and   not   flat-footed.   
Attempting  to  deflect  a  ranged  weapon  doesn’t  count  as  an  action.  
Unusually  massive  ranged  weapons,  such  as  boulders  hurled  by  
giants,  and  ranged  attacks  generated  by  spell  effects,  such  as  Melf’s 
acid arrow, can’t be deflected. 
Special: A monk may select Deflect Arrows as a bonus feat at 2nd 
level, even if she does not meet the prerequisites. 
A  fighter  may  select  Deflect  Arrows  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38). 
 
DEFT HANDS [GENERAL] 
You have exceptional manual dexterity. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Sleight  of  Hand  checks  and  
Use Rope checks. 
 
DIEHARD [GENERAL] 
You can remain conscious after attacks that would fell others. 
Prerequisite: Endurance. 
Benefit:  When  reduced  to  between  –1  and  –9  hit  points,  you  
automatically  become  stable.  You  don’t  have  to  roll  d%  to  see  if  you  
lose 1 hit point each round. 
When  reduced  to  negative  hit  points,  you  may  choose  to  act  as  if  
you  were  disabled,  rather  than  dying.  You  must  make  this  decision  
as soon as you are reduced to negative hit points (even if it isn’t your 
turn).  If  you  do  not  choose  to  act  as  if  you  were  disabled,  you  
immediately fall unconscious. 
When  using  this  feat,  you  can  take  either  a  single  move  or  stan-
dard action each turn, but not both, and you cannot take a full-round 
action. You can take a move action without further injuring yourself, 
but if you perform any standard action (or any other action the DM 
deems  as  strenuous,  including  some  free  actions,  such  as  casting  a  
quickened  spell)  you  take  1  point  of  damage  after  completing  the  
act. If you reach –10 hit points, you immediately die. 
Normal: A character without this feat who is reduced to between 
–1  and  –9  hit  points  is  unconscious  and  dying,  as  described  in  
Chapter 8: Combat. 
 
DILIGENT [GENERAL] 
Your   meticulousness   allows   you   to   analyze   minute   details   that   
others miss. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on all Appraise checks and Decipher 
Script checks. 
 
DODGE [GENERAL] 
You are adept at dodging blows. 
Prerequisite: Dex 13. 
Benefit:  During  your  action,  you  designate  an  opponent  and  
receive  a  +1  dodge  bonus  to  Armor  Class  against  attacks  from  that  
opponent. You can select a new opponent on any action. 
A  condition  that  makes  you  lose  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  Armor  
Class   (if   any)   also   makes   you   lose   dodge   bonuses.   Also,   dodge   
bonuses  (such  as  this  one  and  a  dwarf’s  racial  bonus  on  dodge  
attempts  against  giants)  stack  with  each  other,  unlike  most  other  
types of bonuses. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Dodge  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38). 
 
EMPOWER SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast spells to greater effect. 
Benefit:  All  variable,  numeric  effects  of  an  empowered  spell  are  
increased by one-half. An empowered spell deals half again as much 
damage  as  normal,  cures  half  again  as  many  hit  points,  affects  half  
again  as  many  targets,  and  so  forth,  as  appropriate.  For  example,  an  
empowered magic  missile  deals  1-1/2  times  its  normal  damage  (roll  
1d4+1  and  multiply  the  result  by  1-1/2  for  each  missile).  Saving  
throws  and  opposed  rolls  (such  as  the  one  you  make  when  you  cast  
dispel   magic)   are   not   affected,   nor   are   spells   without   random   
variables. An empowered spell uses up a spell slot two levels higher 
than the spell’s actual level. 
 
ENDURANCE [GENERAL] 
You are capable of amazing feats of stamina. 
Benefit:  You  gain  a  +4  bonus  on  the  following  checks  and  saves:  
Swim   checks   made   to   resist   nonlethal   damage   (see   page   84),   
Constitution   checks   made   to   continue   running   (see   page   144),   
Constitution  checks  made  to  avoid  nonlethal  damage  from  a  forced  
march (see page 164), Constitution checks made to hold your breath 
(see  page  84),  Constitution  checks  
made  to  avoid  nonlethal  damage  
from   starvation   or   thirst   (see   
page  304  of  the  Dun-
geon   Master’s   Guide), 
Fortitude saves made to avoid 
nonlethal damage from hot or 
cold  environments  (see  pages  
302 and 303 of the Dungeon 
Master’s  Guide),  and  Forti-
tude   saves   made   to   resist   
damage     from     suffocation     
(see  page  304  of  the  Dun-
geon  Master’s  Guide).  Also,  
you  may  sleep  in  light  
or     medium     armor     
without    becoming    
fatigued. 
Normal:   A   
character 
without this 
feat      who      
sleeps     in     
medium 
Illus. by J. Foster 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
94 
or heavier armor is automatically fatigued the next day. 
Special:  A  ranger  automatically  gains  Endurance  as  a  bonus  feat  
at 3rd level (see page 48). He need not select it. 
 
ENLARGE SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast spells farther than normal. 
Benefit:  You  can  alter  a  spell  with  a  range  of  close,  medium,  or  
long to increase its range by 100%. An enlarged spell with a range of 
close  now  has  a  range  of  50  ft.  +  5  ft./level,  while  medium-range  
spells have a range of 200 ft. + 20 ft./level and long-range spells have 
a range of 800 ft. + 80 ft./level. An enlarged spell uses up a spell slot 
one level higher than the spell’s actual level. 
Spells  whose  ranges  are  not  defined  by  distance,  as  well  as  spells  
whose ranges are not close, medium, or long, do not have increased 
ranges. 
 
ESCHEW MATERIALS [GENERAL] 
You can cast spells without relying on material components. 
Benefit:  You  can  cast  any  spell  that  has  a  material  component  
costing 1 gp or less without needing that component. (The casting of 
the spell still provokes attacks of opportunity as normal.) If the spell 
requires  a  material  component  that  costs  more  than  1  gp,  you  must  
have  the  material  component  at  hand  to  cast  the  spell,  just  as  
normal. 
 
EXOTIC WEAPON PROFICIENCY [GENERAL] 
Choose  a  type  of  exotic  weapon,  such  as  dire  flail  or  shuriken  (see  
Table  7–5:  Weapons,  page  116,  for  a  list  of  exotic  weapons).  You  
understand how to use that type of exotic weapon in combat. 
Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +1 (plus Str 13 for bastard sword 
or dwarven waraxe). 
Benefit: You make attack rolls with the weapon normally. 
Normal: A character who uses a weapon with which he or she is 
not proficient takes a –4 penalty on attack rolls. 
Special: You can gain Exotic Weapon Proficiency multiple times. 
Each  time  you  take  the  feat,  it  applies  to  a  new  type  of  exotic  
weapon.  Proficiency  with  the  bastard  sword  or  the  dwarven  waraxe  
has an additional prerequisite of Str 13. 
A  fighter  may  select  Exotic  Weapon  Proficiency  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38) 
EXTEND SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast spells that last longer than normal. 
Benefit:  An  extended  spell  lasts  twice  as  long  as  normal.  A  spell  
with a duration of concentration, instantaneous, or permanent is not 
affected by this feat. An extended spell uses up a spell slot one level 
higher than the spell’s actual level. 
 
EXTRA TURNING [GENERAL] 
You can turn or rebuke creatures more often than normal. 
Prerequisite: Ability to turn or rebuke creatures. 
Benefit:  Each  time  you  take  this  feat,  you  can  use  your  ability  to  
turn or rebuke creatures four more times per day than normal. 
If  you  have  the  ability  to  turn  or  rebuke  more  than  one  kind  of  
creature   (such   as   a   good-aligned   cleric   with   access   to   the   Fire   
domain,  who  can  turn  undead  and  water  creatures  and  can  also  
rebuke  fire  creatures),  each  of  your  turning  or  rebuking  abilities  
gains four additional uses per day. 
Normal:  Without  this  feat,  a  character  can  typically  turn  or  
rebuke undead (or other creatures) a number of times per day equal 
to 3 + his or her Charisma modifier. 
Special:  You  can  gain  Extra  Turning  multiple  times.  Its  effects  
stack. Each time you take the feat, you can use each of your turning 
or rebuking abilities four additional times per day. 
 
FAR SHOT [GENERAL] 
You can get greater distance out of a ranged weapon. 
Prerequisite: Point Blank Shot. 
Benefit:  When  you  use  a  projectile  weapon,  such  as  a  bow,  its  
range  increment  increases  by  one-half  (multiply  by  1-1/2).  When  
you use a thrown weapon, its range increment is doubled. 
Special: A fighter may select Far Shot as one of his fighter bonus 
feats (see page 38). 
 
FORGE RING [ITEM CREATION] 
You can create magic rings, which have varied magical effects. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 12th. 
Benefit:  You  can  create  any  ring  whose  prerequisites  you  meet  
(see  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  for  prerequisites  and  other  infor-
mation  on  rings).  Crafting  a  ring  takes  one  day  for  each  1,000  gp  in  
its base price. To craft a ring, you must spend 1/25 of its base price in 
XP and use up raw materials costing one-half of its base price. 
You can also mend a broken ring if it is one that you could make. 
Doing so costs half the XP, half the raw materials, and half the time 
it would take to forge that ring in the first place. 
Some magic rings incur extra costs in material components or XP, 
as noted in their descriptions. For example, a ring of three wishes costs 
15,000  XP  in  addition  to  costs  derived  from  its  base  price  (as  many  
XP  as  it  costs  to  cast  wish  three  times).  You  must  pay  such  a  cost  to  
forge such a ring or to mend a broken one. 
 
GREAT CLEAVE [GENERAL] 
You can wield a melee weapon with such power that you can strike 
multiple times when you fell your foes. 
Prerequisites: Str 13, Cleave, Power Attack, base attack bonus +4. 
Benefit: This feat works like Cleave, except that there is no limit 
to the number of times you can use it per round. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Great  Cleave  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
GREAT FORTITUDE [GENERAL] 
You are tougher than normal. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on all Fortitude saving throws. 
 
GREATER SPELL FOCUS [GENERAL] 
Choose  a  school  of  magic  to  which  you  already  have  applied  the  
Spell Focus feat. Your spells of that school are now even more potent 
than before. 
Benefit:  Add  +1  to  the  Difficulty  Class  for  all  saving  throws  
against spells from the school of magic you select. This bonus stacks 
with the bonus from Spell Focus. 
Special:  You  can  gain  this  feat  multiple  times.  Its  effects  do  not  
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new school of magic 
to which you already have applied the Spell Focus feat. 
 
GREATER SPELL PENETRATION [GENERAL] 
Your spells are remarkably potent, breaking through spell resistance 
more readily than normal. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
95
Prerequisite: Spell Penetration. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on caster level checks (1d20 + caster 
level)  made  to  overcome  a  creature’s  spell  resistance.  This  bonus  
stacks with the one from Spell Penetration (see page 100). 
 
GREATER TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING 
[GENERAL] 
You are a master at fighting two-handed. 
Prerequisites:  Dex  19,  Improved  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  Two-
Weapon Fighting, base attack bonus +11. 
Benefit: You get a third attack with your off-hand weapon, albeit 
at a –10 penalty. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Greater  Two-Weapon  Fighting  as  
one of his fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
An  11th-level  ranger  who  has  chosen  the  two-weapon  combat  
style  is  treated  as  having  Greater  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  even  if  he  
does  not  have  the  prerequisites  for  it,  but  only  when  he  is  wearing  
light or no armor (see page 48). 
 
GREATER WEAPON FOCUS [GENERAL] 
Choose  one  type  of  weapon,  such  as  greataxe,  for  which  you  have  
already selected Weapon Focus. You can also choose unarmed strike 
or   grapple   as   your   weapon   for   purposes   of   this   feat.   You   are   
especially good at using this weapon. 
Prerequisites: Proficiency with selected weapon, Weapon Focus 
with selected weapon, fighter level 8th. 
Benefit:  You  gain  a  +1  bonus  on  all  attack  rolls  you  make  using  
the selected weapon. This bonus stacks with other bonuses on attack 
rolls, including the one from Weapon Focus (see below). 
Special:  You  can  gain  Greater  Weapon  Focus  multiple  times.  Its  
effects  do  not  stack.  Each  time  you  take  the  feat,  it  applies  to  a  new  
type of weapon. 
A  fighter  must  have  Greater  Weapon  Focus  with  a  given  weapon  
to gain the Greater Weapon Specialization feat for that weapon.  
A  fighter  may  select  Greater  Weapon  Focus  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
GREATER WEAPON SPECIALIZATION 
[GENERAL] 
Choose  one  type  of  weapon,  such  as  greataxe,  for  which  you  have  
already   selected   Weapon   Specialization.   You   can   also   choose   
unarmed  strike  or  grapple  as  your  weapon  for  purposes  of  this  feat.  
You deal extra damage when using this weapon. 
Prerequisites:    Proficiency    with    selected    weapon,    Greater    
Weapon  Focus  with  selected  weapon,  Weapon  Focus  with  selected  
weapon,  Weapon  Specialization  with  selected  weapon,  fighter  level  
12th. 
Benefit: You gain a +2 bonus on all damage rolls you make using 
the  selected  weapon.  This  bonus  stacks  with  other  bonuses  on  
damage  rolls,  including  the  one  from  Weapon  Specialization  (see  
below). 
Special:  You  can  gain  Greater  Weapon  Specialization  multiple  
times. Its effects do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies 
to a new type of weapon. 
A  fighter  may  select  Greater  Weapon  Specialization  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
HEIGHTEN SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast a spell as if it were a higher-level spell than it actually is. 
Benefit:  A  heightened  spell  has  a  higher  spell  level  than  normal  
(up  to  a  maximum  of  9th  level).  Unlike  other  metamagic  feats,  
Heighten Spell actually increases the effective level of the spell that 
it  modifies.  All  effects  dependent  on  spell  level  (such  as  saving  
throw DCs and ability to penetrate a lesser globe of invulnerability) are 
calculated according to the heightened level. The heightened spell is 
as  difficult  to  prepare  and  cast  as  a  spell  of  its  effective  level.  For  
example,   a   cleric   could   prepare   hold   person   as   a   4th-level   spell   
(instead of a 2nd-level spell), and it would in all ways be treated as a 
4th-level spell. 
 
IMPROVED BULL RUSH [GENERAL] 
You know how to push opponents back. 
Prerequisites: Str 13, Power Attack. 
Benefit:  When  you  perform  a  bull  rush  (page  154),  you  do  not  
provoke an attack of opportunity from the defender. You also gain a 
+4 bonus on the opposed Strength check you make to push back the 
defender. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Bull  Rush  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED COUNTERSPELL [GENERAL] 
You understand the nuances of magic to such an extent that you can 
counter your opponent’s spells with great efficiency. 
Benefit:  When  counterspelling,  you  may  use  a  spell  of  the  same  
school that is one or more spell levels higher than the target spell. 
Normal: Without this feat, you may counter a spell only with the 
same  spell  or  with  a  spell  specifically  designated  as  countering  the  
target spell. 
 
IMPROVED CRITICAL [GENERAL] 
Choose  one  type  of  weapon,  such  as  longsword  or  greataxe.  With  
that weapon, you know how to hit where it hurts. 
Prerequisite: Proficient with weapon, base attack bonus +8. 
Benefit: When using the weapon you selected, your threat range 
is  doubled.  For  example,  a  longsword  usually  threatens  a  critical  hit  
on  a  roll  of  19–20  (two  numbers).  If  a  character  using  a  longsword  
has Improved Critical (longsword), the threat range becomes 17–20 
(four numbers). 
Special:  You  can  gain  Improved  Critical  multiple  times.  The  
effects  do  not  stack.  Each  time  you  take  the  feat,  it  applies  to  a  new  
type of weapon. 
This  effect  doesn’t  stack  with  any  other  effect  that  expands  the  
threat range of a weapon (such as the keen edge spell). 
A fighter may select Improved Critical as one of his fighter bonus 
feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED DISARM [GENERAL] 
You know how to disarm opponents in melee combat. 
Prerequisites: Int 13, Combat Expertise. 
Benefit:  You  do  not  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  when  you  
attempt  to  disarm  an  opponent,  nor  does  the  opponent  have  a  
chance  to  disarm  you.  You  also  gain  a  +4  bonus  on  the  opposed  
attack roll you make to disarm your opponent. 
Normal: See the normal disarm rules, page 155. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Disarm  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
A monk may select Improved Disarm as a bonus feat at 6th level, 
even if she does not meet the prerequisites. 
 
IMPROVED FEINT [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at misdirecting your opponent’s attention in combat. 
Prerequisites: Int 13, Combat Expertise. 
Benefit: You can make a Bluff check to feint in combat as a move 
action. 
Normal: Feinting in combat is a standard action. 
A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Feint  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED GRAPPLE [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at grappling opponents. 
Prerequisites: Dex 13, Improved Unarmed Strike. 
Benefit:  You  do  not  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  when  you  
make a touch attack to start a grapple. You also gain a +4 bonus on all 
grapple checks, regardless of whether you started the grapple. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
96 
Normal: Without this feat, you provoke an attack of opportunity 
when you make a touch attack to start a grapple. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Grapple  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
A monk may select Improved Grapple as a bonus feat at 1st level, 
even if she does not meet the prerequisites. 
 
IMPROVED INITIATIVE [GENERAL] 
You can react more quickly than normal in a fight. 
Benefit: You get a +4 bonus on initiative checks. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Initiative  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED OVERRUN [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at knocking down opponents. 
Prerequisites: Str 13, Power Attack. 
Benefit:  When  you  attempt  to  overrun  an  opponent,  the  target  
may  not  choose  to  avoid  you.  You  also  gain  a  +4  bonus  on  your  
Strength check to knock down your opponent. 
Normal: Without this feat, the target of an overrun can choose to 
avoid you or to block you. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Overrun  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED PRECISE SHOT [GENERAL] 
Your ranged attacks can ignore the effects of cover or concealment. 
Prerequisites:   Dex   19,   Point   Blank   Shot,   Precise   Shot,   base   
attack bonus +11. 
Benefit:  Your  ranged  attacks  ignore  the  AC  bonus  granted  to  
targets   by   anything   less   than   total   cover,   and   the   miss   chance   
granted  to  targets  by  anything  less  than  total  concealment.  Total  
cover  and  total  concealment  provide  their  normal  benefits  against  
your ranged attacks. 
In  addition,  when  you  shoot  or  throw  ranged  weapons  at  a  grap-
pling  opponent,  you  automatically  strike  at  the  opponent  you  have  
chosen. 
Normal:  See  pages  150–152  for  rules  on  the  effects  of  cover  and  
concealment.  Without  this  feat,  a  character  who  shoots  or  throws  a  
ranged  weapon  at  a  target  involved  in  a  grapple  must  roll  randomly  
to see which grappling combatant the attack strikes. 
Special: A fighter may select Improved Precise Shot as one of his 
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
An  11th-level  ranger  who  has  chosen  the  archery  combat  style  is  
treated  as  having  Improved  Precise  Shot,  even  if  he  does  not  have  
the  prerequisites  for  it,  but  only  when  he  is  wearing  light  or  no  
armor (see page 48). 
 
IMPROVED SHIELD BASH [GENERAL] 
You  can  bash  with  a  shield  while  retaining  its  shield  bonus  to  your  
Armor Class. 
Prerequisite: Shield Proficiency. 
Benefit: When you perform a shield bash, you may still apply the 
shield’s shield bonus to your AC. 
Normal:  Without  this  feat,  a  character  who  performs  a  shield  
bash loses the shield’s shield bonus to AC until his or her next turn. 
Special: A fighter may select Improved Shield Bash as one of his 
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED SUNDER [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at attacking your opponents’ weapons and shields, as 
well as other objects. 
Prerequisites: Str 13, Power Attack. 
Benefit: When you strike at an object held or carried by an 
opponent (such as a weapon or shield), you do not provoke an attack 
of opportunity (see Sunder, page 158). 
You  also  gain  a  +4  bonus  on  any  attack  roll  made  to  attack  an  
object held or carried by another character. 
Normal: Without this feat, you provoke an attack of opportunity 
when you strike at an object held or carried by another character. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Sunder  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED TRIP [GENERAL] 
You  are  trained  not  only  in  tripping  opponents  safely  but  also  in  
following through with an attack. 
Prerequisites: Int 13, Combat Expertise. 
Benefit:  You  do  not  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  when  you  
attempt to trip an opponent while you are unarmed. You also gain a 
+4 bonus on your Strength check to trip your opponent. 
If  you  trip  an  opponent  in  melee  combat,  you  immediately  get  a  
melee attack against that opponent as if you hadn’t used your attack 
for  the  trip  attempt.  For  example,  at  11th  level,  Tordek  gets  three  
attacks  at  bonuses  of  +11,  +6,  and  +1.  In  the  current  round,  he  
attempts  to  trip  his  opponent.  His  first  attempt  fails  (using  up  his  
first   attack).   His   second   attempt   succeeds,   and   he   immediately   
makes  a  melee  attack  against  his  opponent  with  a  bonus  of  +6.  
Finally, he takes his last attack at a bonus of +1. 
Normal: Without this feat, you provoke an attack of opportunity 
when  you  attempt  to  trip  an  opponent  while  you  are  unarmed.  See  
Trip, page 158. 
Special:  At  6th  level,  a  monk  may  select  Improved  Trip  as  a  
bonus feat, even if she does not have the prerequisites. 
A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Trip  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38). 
 
IMPROVED TURNING [GENERAL] 
Your turning or rebuking attempts are more powerful than normal. 
Prerequisite: Ability to turn or rebuke creatures. 
Benefit:  You  turn  or  rebuke  creatures  as  if  you  were  one  level  
higher than you are in the class that grants you the ability. 
 
IMPROVED TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING 
[GENERAL] 
You are an expert in fighting two-handed. 
Prerequisites: Dex 17, Two-Weapon Fighting, base attack bonus 
+6. 
Benefit:  In  addition  to  the  standard  single  extra  attack  you  get  
with an off-hand weapon, you get a second attack with it, albeit at a –
5 penalty (see Table 8–10, page 160). 
Normal: Without this feat, you can only get a single extra attack 
with an off-hand weapon. 
Special: A fighter may select Improved Two-Weapon Fighting as 
one of his fighter bonus feats. 
A  6th-level  ranger  who  has  chosen  the  two-weapon  combat  style  
is  treated  as  having  Improved  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  even  if  he  
does  not  have  the  prerequisites  for  it,  but  only  when  he  is  wearing  
light or no armor (see page 48). 
 
IMPROVED UNARMED STRIKE [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at fighting while unarmed. 
Benefit: You are considered to be armed even when unarmed —
that  is,  you  do  not  provoke  attacks  or  opportunity  from  armed  
opponents  when  you  attack  them  while  unarmed.  However,  you  
still  get  an  attack  of  opportunity  against  any  opponent  who  makes  
an unarmed attack on you. 
In  addition,  your  unarmed  strikes  can  deal  lethal  or  nonlethal  
damage, at your option. 
Normal:  Without  this  feat,  you  are  considered  unarmed  when  
attacking  with  an  unarmed  strike,  and  you  can  deal  only  nonlethal  
damage with such an attack. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
97
Special:  A  monk  automatically  gains  Improved  Unarmed  Strike  
as a bonus feat at 1st level. She need not select it. 
A  fighter  may  select  Improved  Unarmed  Strike  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
INVESTIGATOR [GENERAL] 
You have a knack for finding information. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Gather  Information  checks  
and Search checks. 
 
IRON WILL [GENERAL] 
You have a stronger will than normal. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on all Will saving throws. 
 
LEADERSHIP [GENERAL] 
You are the sort of person others want to follow, and you have done 
some work attempting to recruit cohorts and followers. 
Prerequisite: Character level 6th. 
Benefit:    You    can    attract    loyal    companions    and    
devoted followers, subordinates who assist you. Your DM 
has  information  on  what  sort  of  cohort  and  how  many  
followers you can recruit. 
Special: Check with your DM before selecting this feat, and work 
with your DM to determine an appropriate cohort and followers for 
your  character  (the  Dungeon Master’s Guide has more information on 
cohorts and followers). 
 
LIGHTNING REFLEXES [GENERAL] 
You have faster than normal reflexes. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on all Reflex saving throws. 
 
MAGICAL APTITUDE [GENERAL] 
You have a knack for magical endeavors. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Spellcraft  checks  and  Use  
Magic Device checks. 
 
MANYSHOT [GENERAL] 
You can fire multiple arrows simultaneously against a nearby target. 
Prerequisites: Dex 17, Point Blank Shot, Rapid Shot, base attack 
bonus +6 
Benefit: As a standard action, you may fire two arrows at a single 
opponent within 30 feet. Both arrows use the same attack roll (with 
a  –4  penalty)  to  determine  success  and  deal  damage  normally  (but  
see Special). 
For every five points of base attack bonus you have above +6, you 
may  add  one  additional  arrow  to  this  attack,  to  a  maximum  of  four  
arrows  at  a  base  attack  bonus  of  +16.  However,  each  arrow  after  the  
second  adds  a  cumulative  –2  penalty  on  the  attack  roll  (for  a  total  
penalty of –6 for three arrows and –8 for four). 
Damage  reduction  and  other  resistances  apply  separately  against  
each arrow fired. 
Special:  Regardless  of  the  number  of  arrows  you  fire,  you  apply  
precision-based damage (such as sneak attack damage) only once. If 
you  score  a  critical  hit,  only  the  first  arrow  fired  deals  critical  
damage; all others deal regular damage. 
A  fighter  may  select  Manyshot  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  feats  
(see page 38). 
A  6th-level  ranger  who  has  chosen  the  archery  combat  style  is  
treated   as   having   Manyshot   even   if   he   does   not   have   the   
prerequisites  for  it,  but  only  when  he  is  wearing  light  or  no  armor  
(see page 48). 
 
MARTIAL WEAPON PROFICIENCY 
[GENERAL] 
Choose  a  type  of  martial  weapon,  such  as  a  longbow  
(see Table 7–5: Weapons, page 116, for a list of martial 
weapons).  You  understand  how  to  use  that  type  of  
martial   weapon   in   combat.   
Use  this  feat  to  expand  the  
list  of  weapons  with  which  
you  are  proficient  beyond  the  basic  list  in  your  
class description. 
Benefit:  You  make  attack  rolls  with  the  selected  
weapon normally. 
Normal:  When  using  a  weapon  with  which  you  are  
not proficient, you take a –4 penalty on attack rolls. 
Special:  Barbarians,  fighters,  paladins,  and  rangers  are  
proficient  with  all  martial  weapons.  They  need  not  select  
this feat. 
You   can   gain   Martial   Weapon   Proficiency   multiple   
times.  Each  time  you  take  the  feat,  it  applies  to  a  new  type  of  
weapon.  
A  cleric  who  chooses  the  War  domain  automatically  gains  the  
Martial   Weapon   Proficiency   feat   related   to   his   deity’s   favored   
weapon as a bonus feat, if the weapon is a martial one. He need not 
select it. 
A  sorcerer  or  wizard  who  casts  the  spell  Tenser’s  transformation  on  
himself or herself gains proficiency with all martial weapons for the 
duration of the spell. 
 
MAXIMIZE SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast spells to maximum effect. 
Benefit:  All  variable,  numeric  effects  of  a  spell  modified  by  this  
feat  are  maximized.  A  maximized  spell  deals  maximum  damage,  
cures  the  maximum  number  of  hit  points,  affects  the  maximum  
number  of  targets,  etc.,  as  appropriate.  For  example,  a  maximized  
fireball deals 6 points of damage per caster level (up to a maximum of 
60 points of damage at 10th caster level). Saving throws and opposed 
rolls  (such  as  the  one  you  make  when  you  cast  dispel  magic)  are  not  
affected, nor are spells without random variables. A maximized spell 
uses up a spell slot three levels higher than the spell’s actual level. 
Illus. by J. Jarvis 
Attacking with two arrows,
thanks to the Manyshot feat. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
98 
An  empowered,  maximized  spell  gains  the  separate  benefits  of  
each  feat:  the  maximum  result  plus  one-half  the  normally  rolled  
result. An empowered, maximized fireball cast by a 15th-level wizard 
deals points of damage equal to 60 plus one half of 10d6. 
 
MOBILITY [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at dodging past opponents and avoiding blows. 
Prerequisites: Dex 13, Dodge. 
Benefit: You get a +4 dodge bonus to Armor Class against attacks 
of opportunity caused when you move out of or within a threatened 
area.  A  condition  that  makes  you  lose  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  
Armor  Class  (if  any)  also  makes  you  lose  dodge  bonuses.  Dodge  
bonuses  (such  as  this  one  and  a  dwarf’s  racial  bonus  on  dodge  
attempts  against  giants)  stack  with  each  other,  unlike  most  types  of  
bonuses. 
Special: A fighter may select Mobility as one of his fighter bonus 
feats (see page 38). 
 
MOUNTED ARCHERY [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at using ranged weapons while mounted. 
Prerequisites: Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat. 
Benefit: The penalty you take when using a ranged weapon while 
mounted is halved: –2 instead of –4 if your mount is taking a double 
move,  and  –4  instead  of  –8  if  your  mount  is  running  (see  Mounted  
Combat, page 157). 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Mounted  Archery  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
MOUNTED COMBAT [GENERAL] 
You are skilled in mounted combat. 
Prerequisite: Ride 1 rank. 
Benefit: Once per round when your mount is hit in combat, you 
may attempt a Ride check (as a reaction) to negate the hit. The hit is 
negated  if  your  Ride  check  result  is  greater  than  the  opponent’s  
attack  roll.  (Essentially,  the  Ride  check  result  becomes  the  mount’s  
Armor Class if it’s higher than the mount’s regular AC.) 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Mounted  Combat  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
NATURAL SPELL [GENERAL] 
You can cast spells while in a wild shape. 
Prerequisites: Wis 13, wild shape ability. 
Benefit: You can complete the verbal and somatic components of 
spells  while  in  a  wild  shape.  For  example,  while  in  the  form  of  a  
hawk,  you  could  substitute  screeches  and  gestures  with  your  talons  
for  the  normal  verbal  and  somatic  components  of  a  spell.  You  can  
also  use  any  material  components  or  focuses  you  possess,  even  if  
such items are melded within your current form. This feat does not 
permit the use of magic items while you are in a form that could not 
ordinarily  use  them,  and  you  do  not  gain  the  ability  to  speak  while  
in a wild shape. 
 
NEGOTIATOR [GENERAL] 
You are good at gauging and swaying attitudes. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Diplomacy  checks  and  Sense  
Motive checks. 
 
NIMBLE FINGERS [GENERAL] 
You are adept at manipulating small, delicate objects. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Disable  Device  checks  and  
Open Lock checks. 
 
PERSUASIVE [GENERAL] 
You have a way with words and body language. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Bluff  checks  and  Intimidate  
checks. 
POINT BLANK SHOT [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at making well-placed shots with ranged weapons at 
close range. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +1  bonus  on  attack  and  damage  rolls  with  
ranged weapons at ranges of up to 30 feet. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Point  Blank  Shot  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
POWER ATTACK [GENERAL] 
You can make exceptionally powerful melee attacks. 
Prerequisite: Str 13. 
Benefit:  On  your  action,  before  making  attack  rolls  for  a  round,  
you may choose to subtract a number from all melee attack rolls and 
add  the  same  number  to  all  melee  damage  rolls.  This  number  may  
not exceed your base attack bonus. The penalty on attacks and bonus 
on damage apply until your next turn. 
Special:  If  you  attack  with  a  two-handed  weapon,  or  with  a  one-
handed weapon wielded in two hands, instead add twice the number 
subtracted  from  your  attack  rolls.  You  can’t  add  the  bonus  from  
Power  Attack  to  the  damage  dealt  with  a  light  weapon  (except  with  
unarmed   strikes   or   natural   weapon   attacks),   even   though   the   
penalty  on  attack  rolls  still  applies.  (Normally,  you  treat  a  double  
weapon  as  a  one-handed  weapon  and  a  light  weapon.  If  you  choose  
to  use  a  double  weapon  like  a  two-handed  weapon,  attacking  with  
only one end of it in a round, you treat it as a two-handed weapon.) 
A fighter may select Power Attack as one of his fighter bonus feats 
(see page 38). 
 
PRECISE SHOT [GENERAL] 
You are skilled at timing and aiming ranged attacks. 
Prerequisite: Point Blank Shot. 
Benefit: You can shoot or throw ranged weapons at an opponent 
engaged  in  melee  without  taking  the  standard  –4  penalty  on  your  
attack roll (see Shooting or Throwing into a Melee, page 140). 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Precise  Shot  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
QUICK DRAW [GENERAL] 
You can draw weapons with startling speed. 
Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +1. 
Benefit:  You  can  draw  a  weapon  as  a  free  action  instead  of  as  a  
move  action.  You  can  draw  a  hidden  weapon  (see  the  Sleight  of  
Hand skill, page 81) as a move action. 
A  character  who  has  selected  this  feat  may  throw  weapons  at  his  
full normal rate of attacks (much like a character with a bow). 
Normal:  Without  this  feat,  you  may  draw  a  weapon  as  a  move  
action,  or  (if  your  base  attack  bonus  is  +1  or  higher)  as  a  free  action  
as part of movement (see page 142). Without this feat, you can draw 
a hidden weapon as a standard action. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Quick  Draw  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
QUICKEN SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast a spell with a moment’s thought. 
Benefit:  Casting  a  quickened  spell  is  a  free  action.  You  can  per-
form  another  action,  even  casting  another  spell,  in  the  same  round  
as you cast a quickened spell. You may cast only one quickened spell 
per  round.  A  spell  whose  casting  time  is  more  than  1  full-round  
action  cannot  be  quickened.  A  quickened  spell  uses  up  a  spell  slot  
four  levels  higher  than  the  spell’s  actual  level.  Casting  a  quickened  
spell doesn’t provoke an attack of opportunity. 
Special: This feat can’t be applied to any spell cast spontaneously 
(including  sorcerer  spells,  bard  spells,  and  cleric  or  druid  spells  cast  
spontaneously),  since  applying  a  metamagic  feat  to  a  spontaneously  
cast  spell  automatically  increases  the  casting  time  to  a  full-round  
action. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
99
RAPID RELOAD [GENERAL] 
Choose  a  type  of  crossbow  (hand,  light,  or  heavy).  You  can  reload  a  
crossbow of that type more quickly than normal. 
Prerequisite: Weapon Proficiency (crossbow type chosen). 
Benefit: The time required for you to reload your chosen type of 
crossbow is reduced to a free action (for a hand or light crossbow) or 
a move action (for a heavy crossbow). 
Reloading     a     crossbow     still     
provokes   an   attack   of   oppor-
tunity. 
If   you   have   selected   this   
feat     for     hand     
crossbow or light 
crossbow,        you        
may     fire     that     
weapon       as       
many 
times  in  a  full  attack  
action    as    you    could    
attack  if  you  were  using  a  
bow. 
Normal:  A  character  with-
out   this   feat   needs   a   move   
action  to  reload  a  hand  or  
light   crossbow,   or   a   full-
round   action   to   reload   a   
heavy crossbow.  
Special:  You  can  gain  Rapid  
Reload    multiple    times.    Each    
time you take the feat, it applies 
to a new type of crossbow. 
A  fighter  may  select  Rapid  
Reload   as   one   of   his   fighter   
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
RAPID SHOT 
[GENERAL] 
You      can      use      ranged      
weapons    with    exceptional    
speed. 
Prerequisites:  Dex  13,  Point  
Blank Shot. 
Benefit:  You  can  get  one  extra  attack  per  
round with a ranged weapon. The attack is at your 
highest  base  attack  bonus,  but  each  attack  you  
make  in  that  round  (the  extra  one  and  the  normal  
ones)  takes  a  –2  penalty.  You  must  use  the  full  
attack action (see page 143) to use this feat. 
Special: A fighter may select Rapid Shot as one 
of his fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
A 2nd-level ranger who has chosen the archery 
combat style is treated as having Rapid Shot, even 
if  he  does  not  have  the  prerequisites  for  it,  but  
only  when  he  is  wearing  light  or  no  armor  (see  
page 48). 
 
RIDE-BY ATTACK [GENERAL] 
You  are  skilled  at  making  fast  attacks  for  your  
mount. 
Prerequisites:  Ride  1  rank,  Mounted  
Combat. 
Benefit:       When       you       are       
mounted    and    use    the    charge    
action, you may move and attack as 
if  with  a  standard  charge  and  then  move  again  (continuing  the  
straight line of the charge). Your total movement for the round can’t 
exceed  double  your  mounted  speed.  You  and  your  mount  do  not  
provoke an attack of opportunity from the opponent that you attack. 
Special: A fighter may select Ride-By Attack as one of his fighter 
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
RUN [GENERAL] 
You are fleet of foot. 
Benefit:    When    run-
ning,  you  move  five  times  
your     normal     speed     (if     
wearing     light     or     no     
armor   and   carrying   no   
more  than  a  light  load)  
or     four     times     your     
speed  (if  wearing  med-
ium  or  heavy  armor  or  
carrying  a  medium  or  
heavy   load).   If   you   
make  a  jump  after  a  
running   start   (see   
the  Jump  skill  des-
cription,  page  77),  you  
gain  a  +4  bonus  on  your  
Jump   check.   While   run-
ning,   you   retain   your   Dex-
terity bonus to AC. 
Normal: You move four 
times    your    speed    while    
running  (if  wearing  light  
or  no  armor  and  carrying  
no more than a light load) 
or  three  times  your  speed  
(if   wearing   medium   or   heavy   
armor or carrying a medium or heavy 
load),  and  you  lose  your  Dexterity  
bonus to AC. 
 
SCRIBE SCROLL 
[ITEM CREATION] 
You  can  create  scrolls,  from  which  
you  or  another  spellcaster  can  cast  
the  scribed  spells.  See  the  Dungeon 
Master’s Guide for rules on scrolls. 
Prerequisite: Caster level 1st. 
Benefit:  You  can  create  a  scroll  
of    any    spell    that    you    know.    
Scribing  a  scroll  takes  one  day  
for  each  1,000  gp  in  its  base  
price.   The   base   price   of   a   
scroll  is  its  spell  level  ×  its  
caster level × 25 gp. To scribe 
a   scroll,   you   must   spend   
1/25  of  this  base  price  in  XP  
and    use    up    raw    materials    
costing  one-half  of  this  base  
price. 
Any scroll that stores a spell 
with      a      costly      material      
component   or   an   XP   cost   
also    carries    a    commen-
surate  cost.  In  addition  to  
the  costs  derived  from  the  
Mialee casts a spell from
a scroll she scribed. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
100 
base  price,  you  must  expend  the  material  component  or  pay  the  XP  
when scribing the scroll. 
 
SELF-SUFFICIENT [GENERAL] 
You can take care of yourself in harsh environments and situations. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Heal  checks  and  Survival  
checks. 
 
SHIELD PROFICIENCY [GENERAL] 
You are proficient with bucklers, small shields, and large shields. 
Benefit: You can use a shield and take only the standard penalties 
(see Table 7–6: Armor and Shields, page 123). 
Normal:  When  you  are  using  a  shield  with  which  
you  are  not  proficient,  you  take  the  shield’s  
armor check penalty on attack rolls and 
on    all    skill    checks    that    involve    
moving, including Ride checks. 
Special:       Barbarians,       bards,       
clerics,   druids,   fighters,   paladins,   
and     rangers     automatically     have     
Shield   Proficiency   as   a   bonus   feat.   
They need not select it. 
 
SHOT ON THE RUN 
[GENERAL] 
You   are   highly   trained   in   skirmish   
ranged weapon tactics. 
Prerequisites:     Dex     13,     Dodge,     
Mobility,  Point  Blank  Shot,  base  attack  
bonus +4. 
Benefit: When using the attack action 
with a ranged weapon, you can move both 
before  and  after  the  attack,  provided  that  
your   total   distance   moved   is   not   greater   
than your speed. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Shot  on  the  Run  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
SILENT SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast spells silently. 
Benefit:  A  silent  spell  can  be  cast  with  no  verbal  components.  
Spells  without  verbal  components  are  not  affected.  A  silent  spell  
uses up a spell slot one level higher than the spell’s actual level. 
Special: Bard spells cannot be enhanced by this metamagic feat. 
 
SIMPLE WEAPON PROFICIENCY [GENERAL] 
You  understand  how  to  use  all  types  of  simple  weapons  in  combat  
(see Table 7–5: Weapons, page 116, for a list of simple weapons). 
Benefit: You make attack rolls with simple weapons normally. 
Normal:   When   using   a   weapon   with   which   you   are   not   
proficient, you take a –4 penalty on attack rolls. 
Special:  All  characters  except  for  druids,  monks,  rogues,  and  
wizards  are  automatically  proficient  with  all  simple  weapons.  They  
need not select this feat. 
A  sorcerer  or  wizard  who  casts  the  spell  Tenser’s  transformation  on  
himself or herself gains proficiency with all simple weapons for the 
duration of the spell. 
 
SKILL FOCUS [GENERAL] 
Choose a skill, such as Move Silently. You have a special knack with 
that skill. 
Benefit: You get a +3 bonus on all checks involving that skill. 
Special:  You  can  gain  this  feat  multiple  times.  Its  effects  do  not  
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new skill. 
SNATCH ARROWS [GENERAL] 
You  are  adept  at  grabbing  incoming  arrows,  as  well  as  crossbow  
bolts, spears, and other projectile or thrown weapons. 
Prerequisites:   Dex   15,   Deflect   Arrows,   Improved   Unarmed   
Strike. 
Benefit:  When  using  the  Deflect  Arrows  feat  (page  93),  you  may  
catch  the  weapon  instead  of  just  deflecting  it.  Thrown  weapons,  
such  as  spears  or  axes,  can  immediately  be  thrown  back  at  the  
original attacker (even though it isn’t your turn) or kept for later use. 
You must have at least one hand free (holding nothing) to use this 
feat. 
Special: A fighter may select Snatch Arrows as one of his fighter 
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
SPELL FOCUS [GENERAL] 
Choose   a   school   of   magic,   such   as   
illusion.  Your  spells  of  that  school  are  
more potent than normal. 
Benefit:  Add  +1  to  the  Difficulty  
Class   for   all   saving   throws   against   
spells  from  the  school  of  magic  you  
select. 
Special:   You   can   gain   this   feat   
multiple times. Its effects do not stack. 
Each  time  you  take  the  feat,  it  applies  
to a new school of magic. 
 
SPELL MASTERY [SPECIAL] 
You  are  so  intimately  familiar  with  certain  
spells  that  you  don’t  need  a  spellbook  to  
prepare them anymore. 
Prerequisite: Wizard level 1st. 
Benefit:  Each  time  you  take  this  feat,  
choose    a    number    of    spells    equal    to    your    
Intelligence  modifier  that  you  already  know.  From  that  point  on,  
you can prepare these spells without referring to a spellbook. 
Normal:  Without  this  feat,  you  must  use  a  spellbook  to  prepare  
all your spells, except read magic. 
 
SPELL PENETRATION [GENERAL] 
Your  spells  are  especially  potent,  breaking  through  spell  resistance  
more readily than normal. 
Benefit: You get a +2 bonus on caster level checks (1d20 + caster 
level) made to overcome a creature’s spell resistance. 
 
SPIRITED CHARGE [GENERAL] 
You are trained at making a devastating mounted charge. 
Prerequisites: Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat, Ride-By Attack. 
Benefit:  When  mounted  and  using  the  charge  action,  you  deal  
double damage with a melee weapon (or triple damage with a lance). 
Special: A fighter may select Spirited Charge as one of his fighter 
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
SPRING ATTACK [GENERAL] 
You are trained in fast melee attacks and fancy footwork. 
Prerequisites: Dex 13, Dodge, Mobility, base attack bonus +4. 
Benefit: When using the attack action with a melee weapon, you 
can  move  both  before  and  after  the  attack,  provided  that  your  total  
distance  moved  is  not  greater  than  your  speed.  Moving  in  this  way  
does  not  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  from  the  defender  you  
attack,  though  it  might  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity  from  other  
creatures,  if  appropriate.  You  can’t  use  this  feat  if  you  are  wearing  
heavy armor. 
You must move at least 5 feet both before and after you make your 
attack in order to utilize the benefits of Spring Attack. 
Illus. by W. Reynolds 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
101
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Spring  Attack  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
STEALTHY [GENERAL] 
You are particularly good at avoiding notice. 
Benefit:  You  get  a  +2  bonus  on  all  Hide  checks  and  Move  
Silently checks. 
 
STILL SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can cast spells without gestures. 
Benefit:  A  stilled  spell  can  be  cast  with  no  somatic  components.  
Spells  without  somatic  components  are  not  affected.  A  stilled  spell  
uses up a spell slot one level higher than the spell’s actual level. 
 
STUNNING FIST [GENERAL] 
You know how to strike opponents in vulnerable areas. 
Prerequisites:  Dex  13,  Wis  13,  Improved  Unarmed  Strike,  base  
attack bonus +8. 
Benefit: You must declare that you are using this feat before you 
make  your  attack  roll  (thus,  a  failed  attack  roll  ruins  the  attempt).  
Stunning Fist forces a foe damaged by your unarmed attack to make 
a  Fortitude  saving  throw  (DC  10  +  1/2  your  character  level  +  your  
Wis  modifier),  in  addition  to  dealing  damage  normally.  A  defender  
who fails this saving throw is stunned for 1 round (until just before 
your  next  action).  A  stunned  character  can’t  act,  loses  any  Dexterity  
bonus  to  AC,  and  takes  a  –2  penalty  to  AC.  You  may  attempt  a  
stunning attack once per day for every four levels you have attained 
(but  see  Special),  and  no  more  than  once  per  round.  Constructs,  
oozes,  plants,  undead,  incorporeal  creatures,  and  creatures  immune  
to critical hits cannot be stunned. 
Special:  A  monk  may  select  Stunning  Fist  as  a  bonus  feat  at  1st  
level,  even  if  she  does  not  meet  the  prerequisites.  A  monk  who  
selects this feat may attempt a stunning attack a number of times per 
day  equal  to  her  monk  level,  plus  one  more  time  per  day  for  every  
four levels she has in classes other than monk. 
A  fighter  may  select  Stunning  Fist  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats (see page 38). 
 
TOUGHNESS [GENERAL] 
You are tougher than normal. 
Benefit: You gain +3 hit points. 
Special:  A  character  may  gain  this  feat  multiple  times.  Its  effects  
stack. 
 
TOWER SHIELD PROFICIENCY [GENERAL] 
You are proficient with tower shields. 
Prerequisite: Shield Proficiency. 
Benefit:  You  can  use  a  tower  shield  and  suffer  only  the  standard  
penalties (see Table 7–6: Armor and Shields, page 123). 
Normal:  A  character  who  is  using  a  shield  with  which  he  or  she  
is  not  proficient  takes  the  shield’s  armor  check  penalty  on  attack  
rolls and on all skill checks that involve moving, including Ride. 
Special:  Fighters  automatically  have  Tower  Shield  Proficiency  as  
a bonus feat. They need not select it. 
 
TRACK [GENERAL] 
You  can  follow  the  trails  of  creatures  and  characters  across  most  
types of terrain. 
Benefit:  To  find  tracks  or  to  follow  them  for  1  mile  requires  a  
successful  Survival  check.  You  must  make  another  Survival  check  
every time the tracks become difficult to follow, such as when other 
tracks cross them or when the tracks backtrack and diverge. 
You  move  at  half  your  normal  speed  (or  at  your  normal  speed  
with a –5 penalty on the check, or at up to twice your normal speed 
with  a  –20  penalty  on  the  check).  The  DC  depends  on  the  surface  
and the prevailing conditions, as given on the table below: 
 
Surface                       Survival                       DC                       Surface                       Survival                       DC                       
Very soft ground 5 Firm ground 15 
Soft ground 10 Hard ground 20
 
 
Very  Soft  Ground:  Any  surface  (fresh  snow,  thick  dust,  wet  mud)  
that holds deep, clear impressions of footprints. 
Soft  Ground:  Any  surface  soft  enough  to  yield  to  pressure,  but  
firmer  than  wet  mud  or  fresh  snow,  in  which  a  creature  leaves  
frequent but shallow footprints. 
Firm Ground: Most normal outdoor surfaces (such as lawns, fields, 
woods,  and  the  like)  or  exceptionally  soft  or  dirty  indoor  surfaces  
(thick rugs and very dirty or dusty floors). The creature might leave 
some  traces  (broken  branches  or  tufts  of  hair),  but  it  leaves  only  
occasional or partial footprints. 
Hard  Ground:  Any  surface  that  doesn’t  hold  footprints  at  all,  such  
as  bare  rock  or  an  indoor  floor.  Most  streambeds  fall  into  this  
category,  since  any  footprints  left  behind  are  obscured  or  washed  
away.  The  creature  leaves  only  traces  (scuff  marks  or  displaced  
pebbles).  
Several modifiers may apply to the Survival check, as given on the 
table below. 
 
Condition Survival DC Modifier 
Every three creatures in the group being tracked –1 
Size of creature or creatures being tracked:
1
  
Fine                                                                                     +8                                                                                     
Diminutive                                                                          +4                                                                          
Tiny                                                                                      +2                                                                                      
Small                                                                                   +1                                                                                   
Medium                                                                              +0                                                                              
Large                                                                                    –1                                                                                    
Huge                                                                                   –2                                                                                   
Gargantuan                                                                         –4                                                                         
Colossal                                                                               –8                                                                               
Every 24 hours since the trail was made +1 
Every hour of rain since the trail was made +1 
Fresh snow cover since the trail was made +10 
Poor visibility:
2
  
Overcast or moonless night +6 
Moonlight                                                                           +3                                                                           
Fog or precipitation +3 
Tracked party hides trail (and moves at half speed) +5 
1 For a group of mixed sizes, apply only the modifier for the largest size 
category. 
2 Apply only the largest modifier from this category.
 
 
If  you  fail  a  Survival  check,  you  can  retry  after  1  hour  (outdoors)  or  
10 minutes (indoors) of searching. 
Normal:  Without  this  feat,  you  can  use  the  Survival  skill  to  find  
tracks,  but  you  can  follow  them  only  if  the  DC  for  the  task  is  10  or  
lower.  Alternatively,  you  can  use  the  Search  skill  to  find  a  footprint  
or similar sign of a creature’s passage using the DCs given above, but 
you  can’t  use  Search  to  follow  tracks,  even  if  someone  else  has  
already found them. 
Special:  A  ranger  automatically  has  Track  as  a  bonus  feat.  He  
need not select it. 
This feat does not allow you to find or follow the tracks made by a 
subject of a pass without trace spell. 
 
TRAMPLE [GENERAL] 
You are trained in using your mount to knock down opponents. 
Prerequisites: Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat. 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
102 
Benefit:   When   you   attempt   to   overrun   an   opponent   while   
mounted, your target may not choose to avoid you. Your mount may 
make  one  hoof  attack  against  any  target  you  knock  down,  gaining  
the  standard  +4  bonus  on  attack  rolls  against  prone  targets  (see  
Overrun, page 157). 
Special: A fighter may select Trample as one of his fighter bonus 
feats (see page 38). 
 
TWO-WEAPON DEFENSE [GENERAL] 
Your two-weapon fighting style bolsters your defense as well as your 
offense. 
Prerequisites: Dex 15, Two-Weapon Fighting. 
Benefit:  When  wielding  a  double  weapon  or  two  weapons  (not  
including natural weapons or unarmed strikes), you gain a +1 shield 
bonus to your AC. 
When  you  are  fighting  defensively  or  using  the  total  defense  
action, this shield bonus increases to +2. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Two-Weapon  Defense  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats. 
 
TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING [GENERAL] 
You can fight with a weapon in each hand. You can make one extra 
attack each round with the second weapon. 
Prerequisite: Dex 15. 
Benefit:  Your  penalties  on  attack  rolls  for  fighting  with  two  
weapons are reduced. The penalty for your primary hand lessens by 
2 and the one for your off hand lessens by 6. 
Normal:  See  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  page  160,  and  Table  8–10:  
Two-Weapon Fighting Penalties, page 160. 
Special:  A  2nd-level  ranger  who  has  chosen  the  two-weapon  
combat  style  is  treated  as  having  Two-Weapon  Fighting,  even  if  he  
does  not  have  the  prerequisite  for  it,  but  only  when  he  is  wearing  
light or no armor (see page 48). 
A  fighter  may  select  Two-Weapon  Fighting  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
WEAPON FINESSE [GENERAL] 
You are especially skilled at using weapons that can benefit as much 
from Dexterity as from Strength. 
Prerequisite: Base attack bonus +1. 
Benefit: With a light weapon, rapier, whip, or spiked chain made 
for  a  creature  of  your  size  category,  you  may  use  your  Dexterity  
modifier  instead  of  your  Strength  modifier  on  attack  rolls.  If  you  
carry a shield, its armor check penalty applies to your attack rolls. 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Weapon  Finesse  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats (see page 38). 
Natural weapons are always considered light weapons. 
 
WEAPON FOCUS [GENERAL] 
Choose  one  type  of  weapon,  such  as  greataxe.  You  can  also  choose  
unarmed  strike  or  grapple  (or  ray,  if  you  are  a  spellcaster)  as  your  
weapon  for  purposes  of  this  feat.  You  are  especially  good  at  using  
this  weapon.  (If  you  have  chosen  ray,  you  are  especially  good  with  
rays, such as the one produced by the ray of frost spell.) 
Prerequisites:   Proficiency   with   selected   weapon,   base   attack   
bonus +1. 
Benefit:  You  gain  a  +1  bonus  on  all  attack  rolls  you  make  using  
the selected weapon. 
Special:  You  can  gain  this  feat  multiple  times.  Its  effects  do  not  
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new type of weapon. 
A  fighter  may  select  Weapon  Focus  as  one  of  his  fighter  bonus  
feats  (see  page  38).  He  must  have  Weapon  Focus  with  a  weapon  to  
gain the Weapon Specialization feat for that weapon. 
 
WEAPON SPECIALIZATION [GENERAL] 
Choose  one  type  of  weapon,  such  as  greataxe,  for  which  you  have  
already   selected   the   Weapon   Focus   feat.   You   can   also   choose   
unarmed  strike  or  grapple  as  your  weapon  for  purposes  of  this  feat.  
You deal extra damage when using this weapon. 
Prerequisites: Proficiency with selected weapon, Weapon Focus 
with selected weapon, fighter level 4th. 
Benefit: You gain a +2 bonus on all damage rolls you make using 
the selected weapon. 
Special:  You  can  gain  this  feat  multiple  times.  Its  effects  do  not  
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new type of weapon. 
A  fighter  may  select  Weapon  Specialization  as  one  of  his  fighter  
bonus feats (see page 38). 
 
WHIRLWIND ATTACK [GENERAL] 
You can strike nearby opponents in an amazing, spinning attack. 
Prerequisites:    Dex    13,    Int    13,    Combat    Expertise,    Dodge,    
Mobility, Spring Attack, base attack bonus +4. 
Benefit:  When  you  use  the  full  attack  action,  you  can  give  up  
your  regular  attacks  and  instead  make  one  melee  attack  at  your  full  
base attack bonus against each opponent within reach. 
When  you  use  the  Whirlwind  Attack  feat,  you  also  forfeit  any  
bonus or extra attacks granted by other feats, spells, or abilities (such 
as the Cleave feat or the haste spell). 
Special:  A  fighter  may  select  Whirlwind  Attack  as  one  of  his  
fighter bonus feats. 
 
WIDEN SPELL [METAMAGIC] 
You can increase the area of your spells. 
Benefit:  You  can  alter  a  burst,  emanation,  line,  or  spread  shaped  
spell  to  increase  its  area.  Any  numeric  measurements  of  the  spell’s  
area  increase  by  100%.  For  example,  a  fireball  spell  (which  normally  
produces a 20-foot-radius spread) that is widened now fills a 40-foot-
radius spread. A widened spell uses up a spell slot three levels higher 
than the spell’s actual level. 
Spells  that  do  not  have  an  area  of  one  of  these  four  sorts  are  not  
affected by this feat. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5: 
FEATS
 

 
 
103
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hat  does  your  character  look  like?  How  old  is  she?  
What  sort  of  first  impression  does  she  make?  When  
she  prays,  what  deity  or  deities  does  she  call  on,  if  
any? What led her to become an adventurer? 
This  chapter  helps  you  establish  your  character’s  
identity  by  creating  details  that  make  her  more  lifelike,  like  a  main  
character  in  a  novel  or  a  movie.  For  many  players,  the  action  lies  
here, in defining the character as a person to be roleplayed. 
When  you  first  play  a  character,  it’s  fine  to  leave  the  details  
sketchy.  As  you  play  the  character  over  time,  you  will  get  a  better  
sense  of  who  you  want  her  to  be.  You  will  develop  her  details  in  
much the same way that an author develops a character over several 
drafts of a novel or over several novels in a series. 
This  chapter  covers  alignment  (the  character’s  place  in  the  strug-
gle  between  good  and  evil),  religion  (a  character’s  deity  or  deities),  
vital   statistics   (name,   gender,   age,   and   so   on),   and   personal   
description. 
 
ALIGNMENT 
In the temple of Pelor is an ancient tome. When the temple recruits 
adventurers  for  its  most  sensitive  and  important  quests,  each  one  
who  wants  to  participate  must  kiss  the  book.  Those  who  are  evil  in  
their  hearts  are  blasted  by  holy  power,  and  even  those  who  are  nei-
ther good nor evil are stunned. Only those who are good can kiss the 
tome   without   harm   and   are   trusted   with   the   temple’s   most   
important work. Good and evil are not philosophical concepts in the 
D&D game. They are the forces that define the cosmos. 
Devils  in  human  guise  stalk  the  land,  tempting  people  toward  
evil.  Holy  clerics  use  the  power  of  good  to  protect  worshipers.  De-
votees of evil gods bring ruin on innocents to win the favor of their 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deities,  while  trusting  that  rewards  await  them  in  the  afterlife.  
Crusading  paladins  fearlessly  confront  evildoers,  knowing  that  
this  short  life  is  nothing  worth  clinging  to.  Warlords  turn  to  
whichever  supernatural  power  will  help  them  conquer,  and  
proxies for good and evil gods promise rewards in return for the 
warlords’ oaths of obedience. 
A   creature’s   general   moral   and   personal   attitudes   are   
represented   by   its   alignment:   lawful   good,   neutral   good,   
chaotic  good,  lawful  neutral,  neutral,  chaotic  neutral,  lawful  
evil,  neutral  evil,  and  chaotic  evil.  (See  Table  6–1:  Creature,  
Race, and Class Alignments, on the next page, for examples of 
which creatures, races, and classes favor which alignments.) 
Choose  an  alignment  for  your  character,  using  his  or  her  
race and class as a guide. Most player characters are good or 
neutral  rather  than  evil.  In  general,  evil  alignments  are  for  
villains and monsters. 
Alignment   is   a   tool   for   developing   your   character’s   
identity.   It   is   not   a   straitjacket   for   restricting   your   
character.  Each  alignment  represents  a  broad  range  of  
personality  types  or  personal  philosophies,  so  two  lawful  
good  characters  can  still  be  quite  different  from  each  
other.  In  addition,  few  people  are  completely  consistent.  
A  lawful  good  character  may  have  a  greedy  streak  that  
occasionally  tempts  him  to  take  something  or  hoard  
something   he   has   even   if   that’s   not   lawful   or   good   
behavior. People are also not consistent from day to day. A 
good character can lose his temper, a neutral character can 
be inspired to perform a noble act, and so on. 
 
103

 
 
104 
Choosing  an  alignment  for  your  character  means  stating  your  
intent to play that character a certain way. If your character acts in a 
way  more  appropriate  to  another  alignment,  the  DM  may  decide  
that your character’s alignment has changed to match her actions. 
 
TYPICAL ALIGNMENTS 
Creatures  and  members  of  classes  shown  in  italic  type  on  Table  6–1  
are  always  of  the  indicated  alignment.  Except  for  paladins,  they  are  
born into that alignment. It is inherent, part of their nature. Usually, 
a   creature   with   an   inherent   alignment   has   some   connection   
(through  ancestry,  history,  or  magic)  to  the  Outer  Planes  or  is  a  
magical beast. 
For other creatures, races, and classes, the indicated alignment on 
Table  6–1  is  the  typical  or  most  common  one.  Normal  sentient  
creatures  can  be  of  any  alignment.  They  may  have  inherent  ten-
dencies toward a particular alignment, but individuals can vary from 
this norm. Depending on the type of creature, these tendencies may 
be  stronger  or  weaker.  For  example,  kobolds  and  beholders  are  
usually lawful evil, but kobolds display more variation in alignment 
than  beholders  because  their  inborn  alignment  tendency  isn’t  as  
strong. Also, sentient creatures have cultural tendencies that usually 
reinforce alignment tendencies. For example, orcs tend to be chaotic 
evil,  and  their  culture  tends  to  produce  chaotic  evil  members.  A  
human  raised  among  orcs  is  more  likely  than  normal  to  be  chaotic  
evil, while an orc raised among humans is less likely to be so. 
 
Table 6–1: Creature, Race, and Class Alignments 
Lawful Good Neutral Good Chaotic Good 
Archons Guardinals Eladrins 
Gold dragons Gnomes Copper dragons 
Lammasus                   Centaurs                   Unicorns 
Dwarves                      Giant                      eagles                      Elves                      
Paladins Pseudodragons             Rangers             
 
Lawful Neutral Neutral Chaotic Neutral 
Monks Animals                       Half-elves                       
Wizards                      Halflings                      Half-orcs                      
Formians                     Humans                      Barbarians                     
Azers                            Lizardfolk                            Bards                            
                                    Druids                                    Rogues                                    
 
Lawful Evil Neutral Evil Chaotic Evil 
Devils                           Drow                           Demons 
Blue dragons Goblins Red dragons 
Beholders Allips Vampires 
Ogre mages Ettercaps Troglodytes 
Hobgoblins Devourers                    Gnolls                    
Kobolds                                            Ogres                      
                                                                        Orcs 
 
GOOD VS. EVIL 
Good  characters  and  creatures  protect  innocent  life.  Evil  characters  
and  creatures  debase  or  destroy  innocent  life,  whether  for  fun  or  
profit. 
“Good”  implies  altruism,  respect  for  life,  and  a  concern  for  the  
dignity of sentient beings. Good characters make personal sacrifices 
to help others. 
“Evil”  implies  hurting,  oppressing,  and  killing  others.  Some  evil  
creatures  simply  have  no  compassion  for  others  and  kill  without  
qualms if doing so is convenient. Others actively pursue evil, killing 
for sport or out of duty to some evil deity or master.  
People   who   are   neutral   with   respect   to   good   and   evil   have   
compunctions  against  killing  the  innocent  but  lack  the  commit-
ment to make sacrifices to protect or help others. Neutral people are 
committed  to  others  by  personal  relationships.  A  neutral  person  
may sacrifice himself to protect his family or even his homeland, but 
he would not do so for strangers who are not related to him. 
Being  good  or  evil  can  be  a  conscious  choice,  as  with  the  paladin  
who  attempts  to  live  up  to  her  ideals  or  the  evil  cleric  who  causes  
pain  and  terror  to  emulate  his  god.  For  most  people,  though,  being  
good  or  evil  is  an  attitude  that  one  recognizes  but  does  not  choose.  
Being  neutral  on  the  good–evil  axis  usually  represents  a  lack  of  
commitment  one  way  or  the  other,  but  for  some  it  represents  a  
positive commitment to a balanced view. While acknowledging that 
good  and  evil  are  objective  states,  not  just  opinions,  these  folk  
maintain  that  a  balance  between  the  two  is  the  proper  place  for  
people, or at least for them. 
Animals and other creatures incapable of moral action are neutral 
rather  than  good  or  evil.  Even  deadly  vipers  and  tigers  that  eat  
people are neutral because they lack the capacity for morally right or 
wrong behavior. 
 
LAW VS. CHAOS 
Lawful  characters  tell  the  truth,  keep  their  word,  respect  authority,  
honor  tradition,  and  judge  those  who  fall  short  of  their  duties.  
Chaotic  characters  follow  their  consciences,  resent  being  told  what  
to  do,  favor  new  ideas  over  tradition,  and  do  what  they  promise  if  
they feel like it. 
“Law” implies honor, trustworthiness, obedience to authority, and 
reliability.    On    the    downside,    lawfulness    can    include    close-
mindedness,   reactionary   adherence   to   tradition,   judgmentalness,   
and  a  lack  of  adaptability.  Those  who  consciously  promote  lawful-
ness  say  that  only  lawful  behavior  creates  a  society  in  which  people  
can  depend  on  each  other  and  make  the  right  decisions  in  full  
confidence that others will act as they should. 
“Chaos”   implies   freedom,   adaptability,   and   flexibility.   On   the   
downside,   chaos   can   include   recklessness,   resentment   toward   
legitimate  authority,  arbitrary  actions,  and  irresponsibility.  Those  
who  promote  chaotic  behavior  say  that  only  unfettered  personal  
freedom  allows  people  to  express  themselves  fully  and  lets  society  
benefit from the potential that its individuals have within them. 
Someone  who  is  neutral  with  respect  to  law  and  chaos  has  a  
normal respect for authority and feels neither a compulsion to obey 
nor  a  compulsion  to  rebel.  She  is  honest  but  can  be  tempted  into  
lying or deceiving others. 
Devotion  to  law  or  chaos  may  be  a  conscious  choice,  but  more  
often  it  is  a  personality  trait  that  is  recognized  rather  than  being  
chosen.  Neutrality  on  the  lawful–chaotic  axis  is  usually  simply  a  
middle state, a state of not feeling compelled toward one side or the 
other.   Some   few   such   neutrals,   however,   espouse   neutrality   as   
superior  to  law  or  chaos,  regarding  each  as  an  extreme  with  its  own  
blind spots and drawbacks. 
Animals and other creatures incapable of moral action are neutral. 
Dogs  may  be  obedient  and  cats  free-spirited,  but  they  do  not  have  
the moral capacity to be truly lawful or chaotic. 
 
THE NINE ALIGNMENTS 
Nine distinct alignments define all the possible combinations of the 
lawful–chaotic   axis   with   the   good–evil   axis.   Each   alignment   
description  below  depicts  a  typical  character  of  that  alignment.  
Remember  that  individuals  vary  from  this  norm,  and  that  a  given  
character  may  act  more  or  less  in  accord  with  his  or  her  alignment  
from day to day. Use these descriptions as guidelines, not as scripts. 
The first six alignments, lawful good through chaotic neutral, are 
the   standard   alignments   for   player   characters.   The   three   evil   
alignments are for monsters and villains. 
Lawful Good, “Crusader”: A lawful good character acts as a good 
person  is  expected  or  required  to  act.  She  combines  a  commitment  
to  oppose  evil  with  the  discipline  to  fight  relentlessly.  She  tells  the  
truth,  keeps  her  word,  helps  those  in  need,  and  speaks  out  against  
injustice.   A   lawful   good   character   hates   to   see   the   guilty   go   