CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
135
COMBAT BASICS 
This section summarizes the rules and details concerning combat. 
 
THE BATTLE GRID 
Use  a  battle  grid  (such  as  the  one  in  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide)  to  
visualize  combat  situations.  On  a  battle  grid,  each  1-inch  square  
represents a 5-foot square in the game world. 
 
ROUNDS 
Combat occurs in rounds. In every round, each combatant gets to do 
something. A round represents 6 seconds in the game world. 
 
INITIATIVE 
Before  the  first  round,  each  player  makes  an  initiative  check  for  his  
or her character. The DM makes initiative checks for the opponents. 
An  initiative  check  is  a  Dexterity  check  (1d20+Dexterity  modifier).  
Characters act in order from highest initiative result to lowest, with 
the check applying to all rounds of the combat. 
A character is flat-footed until he or she takes an action. 
 
ACTIONS 
Every  round,  on  your  character’s  turn,  you  may  take  a  standard  
action and a move action (in either order), two move actions, or one 
full-round  action.  You  may  also  perform  one  or  more  free  actions  
along with any other action, as your DM allows. 
 
ATTACKS 
In  combat,  the  most  prevalent  standard  action  is  an  attack.  You  can  
move your speed and make an attack in a round (a move action and a 
standard action). Experienced characters can attack more than once, 
but  only  if  they  don’t  move  (a  full-round  action).  Making  a  ranged  
attack provokes attacks of opportunity from opponents that threaten 
you (see below). 
 
Attack Roll 
To score a hit that deals damage on your attack roll, your result must 
equal or exceed the target’s Armor Class (AC). 
Melee Attack Roll: 1d20 + base attack bonus + Strength modifier 
+ size modifier. 
Ranged   Attack   Roll:   1d20   +   base   attack   bonus   +   Dexterity   
modifier + size modifier + range penalty. 
 
Damage 
If you score a hit, roll damage and deduct it from the target’s current 
hit  points.  Add  your  Strength  modifier  on  damage  rolls  involving  
melee  and  thrown  weapons.  If  you’re  using  a  weapon  in  your  off  
hand,  add  one-half  your  Strength  modifier  (if  it’s  a  bonus).  If  you’re  
wielding  a  weapon  with  both  hands,  add  one  and  a  half  times  your  
Strength modifier (if it’s a bonus.) 
 
Armor Class 
A character’s Armor Class (AC) is the result you need to get on your 
attack roll to hit that character in combat. 
Armor  Class:  10  +  armor  bonus  +  shield  bonus  +  Dexterity  
modifier + size modifier. 
 
Hit Points 
Hit  points  represent  how  much  damage  a  character  can  take  before  
falling unconscious or dying. 
 
SPELLS 
In most cases, you can move your speed and cast a spell in the same 
round   (a   move   action   and   a   standard   action).   Casting   a   spell   
provokes  attacks  of  opportunity  from  opponents  that  threaten  your  
(see below). 
 
SAVING THROWS 
When you are subject to an unusual or magical attack, you generally 
get  a  saving  throw  to  negate  or  reduce  its  effect.  To  succeed  on  a  
saving throw, you need a result equal to or higher than its Difficulty 
Class. 
Fortitude Saving Throw: 1d20 + base save bonus + Constitution 
modifier 
Reflex   Saving   Throw:   1d20   +   base   save   bonus   +   Dexterity   
modifier 
Will Saving Throw: 1d20 + base save bonus + Wisdom modifier 
 
MOVEMENT 
Each  character  has  a  speed  measured  in  feet.  You  can  move  that  
distance as a move action. You can take a move action before or after 
a standard action on your turn in a round. 
You  can  instead  forego  a  standard  action  and  take  two  move  
actions  in  a  round,  which  lets  you  move  double  your  speed.  Or  you  
can  run,  which  lets  you  move  quadruple  your  speed  but  takes  all  of  
your actions for the round. 
 
ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY 
During  combat,  you  threaten  all  squares  adjacent  to  yours,  even  
when  it’s  not  your  turn.  An  opponent  that  takes  certain  actions  
while in a threatened square provokes an attack of opportunity from 
you. An attack of opportunity is a free melee attack that does not use 
up any of your actions. You can make one attack of opportunity per 
round.  Actions  that  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity  include  moving  
(except as noted below), casting a spell, and attacking with a ranged 
weapon. 
You  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  when  you  move  out  of  a  
threatened square, except: 
 If you withdraw (a full-round action), opponents don’t get attacks 
of  opportunity  when  you  move  from  your  initial  square.  If  you  
move  into  another  threatened  square,  however,  opponents  get  
attacks of opportunity when you leave that square. 
 If  your  entire  move  for  the  round  is  5  feet  (a  5-foot  step),  oppo-
nents  don’t get attacks of opportunity when you move. 
 
DEATH, DYING, AND HEALING 
Your  hit  points  represent  how  much  damage  you  can  take  before  
being disabled, knocked unconscious, or killed. 
1  or  More  Hit  Points:  As  long  as  you  have  1  or  more  hit  points,  
you remain fully functional. 
0  Hit  Points:  If  your  hit  points  drop  to  0,  you  are  disabled.  You  
can  only  take  one  move  action  or  standard  action  per  turn,  and  you  
take 1 point of damage after completing an action. 
–1  to  –9  Hit  Points:  If  your  hit  points  drop  to  from  –1  to  –9  hit  
points,  you’re  unconscious  and  dying,  and  you  lose  1  hit  point  per  
round.  Each  round,  before  losing  that  hit  point,  you  have  a  10%  
chance  of  becoming  stable.  While  stable,  you’re  still  unconscious.  
Each  hour  you  have  a  10%  chance  to  regain  consciousness,  and  if  
you don’t, you lose 1 hit point instead. 
–10 Hit Points: If your hit points fall to –10 or lower, you’re dead. 
Healing: You can stop a dying character’s loss of hit points with a 
DC  15  Heal  check  or  with  even  1  point  of  magical  healing.  If  
healing raises a character’s hit points to 1 or more, the character can 
resume acting as normal. 
 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
136 
why you apply your Dexterity modifier to your AC. 
Note that armor limits your Dexterity bonus, so if you’re wearing 
armor, you might not be able to apply your whole Dexterity bonus to 
your AC (see Table 7–6: Armor and Shields, page 123). 
Sometimes  you  can’t  use  your  Dexterity  bonus  (if  you  have  one).  
If  you  can’t  react  to  a  blow,  you  can’t  use  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  
AC. (If you don’t have a Dexterity bonus, nothing happens.) You lose 
your  Dexterity  bonus  when,  for  example,  an  invisible  opponent  
attacks  you,  you’re  hanging  on  the  face  of  a  crumbling  cliff  high  
above a river of lava, or you’re caught flat-footed at the beginning of 
a combat. 
Size  Modifier:  The  bigger  a  creature  is,  the  easier  it  is  to  hit  in  
combat.  The  smaller  it  is,  the  harder  it  is  to  hit.  Since  this  same  
modifier applies to attack rolls, a halfling, for example, doesn’t have a 
hard  time  hitting  another  halfling.  See  Table  8–1:  Size  Modifiers,  
page 134. 
Other Modifiers: Many other factors modify your AC. 
Enhancement   Bonuses:   Enhancement   effects   make   your   armor   
better (+1 chainmail, +2 large shield, etc.). 
Deflection  Bonus:  Magical  deflection  effects  ward  off  attacks  and  
improve your AC. 
Natural Armor: Natural armor improves your AC. (Members of the 
common  races  don’t  have  natural  armor,  which  usually  consists  of  
scales, fur, or layers of huge muscles.) 
Dodge    Bonuses:    Some    other    AC    bonuses    represent    actively    
avoiding  blows,  such  as  the  dwarf’s  AC  bonus  against  giants  or  the  
AC  bonus  for  fighting  defensively.  These  bonuses  are  called  dodge  
bonuses.  Any  situation  that  denies  you  your  Dexterity  bonus  also  
denies you dodge bonuses. (Wearing armor, however, does not limit 
these  bonuses  the  way  it  limits  a  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC.)  Unlike  
most  sorts  of  bonuses,  dodge  bonuses  stack  with  each  other.  A  
dwarf’s  +4  dodge  bonus  against  giants  and  his  +2  dodge  bonus  for  
fighting defensively combine to give him a +6 bonus. 
Touch  Attacks:  Some  attacks  disregard  armor,  including  shields  
and  natural  armor.  For  example,  a  wizard’s  touch  with  a  shocking 
grasp spell hurts you regardless of what armor you’re wearing or how 
thick  your  skin  happens  to  be.  In  these  cases,  the  attacker  makes  a  
touch  attack  roll  (either  ranged  or  melee).  When  you  are  the  target  
of  a  touch  attack,  your  AC  doesn’t  include  any  armor  bonus,  shield  
bonus, or natural armor bonus. All other modifiers, such as your size 
modifier,  Dexterity  modifier,  and  deflection  bonus  (if  any)  apply  
normally. 
For  example,  if  a  sorcerer  tries  to  touch  Tordek  with  a  shocking 
grasp spell, Tordek gets his +1 Dexterity bonus, but not his +4 armor 
bonus for his scale mail or his +2 shield bonus for his large wooden 
shield. His AC is only 11 against a touch attack. 
 
HIT POINTS 
Your hit points tell you how much punishment you can take before 
dropping. Your hit points are based on your class and level, and your 
Constitution  modifier.  applies  Most  monsters’  hit  points  are  based  
on  their  type,  though  some  monsters  have  classes  and  levels,  too.  
(Watch out for medusa sorcerers!) 
When  your  hit  point  total  reaches  0,  you’re  disabled.  When  it  
reaches –1, you’re dying. When it gets to –10, your problems are 
over—you’re dead (see Injury and Death, page 145). 
 
SPEED 
Your  speed  tells  you  how  far  you  can  move  in  a  round  and  still  do  
something, such as attack or cast a spell. Your speed depends mostly 
on your race and what armor you’re wearing. 
Dwarves,   gnomes,   and   halflings   have   a   speed   of   20   feet   (4   
squares),  or  15  feet  (3  squares)  when  wearing  medium  or  heavy  
armor (except for dwarves, who move 20 feet in any armor). 
Humans, elves, half-elves, and half-orcs have a speed of 30 feet (6 
squares), or 20 feet (4 squares) in medium or heavy armor. 
If  you  use  two  move  actions  in  a  round  (sometimes  called  a  
“double move” action), you can move up to double your speed. If you 
spend the entire round to run all out, you can move up to quadruple 
your normal speed (or triple if you are in heavy armor). 
 
SAVING THROWS 
As  an  adventurer,  you  have  more  to  worry  about  than  taking  dam-
age. You also have to face the petrifying gaze of a medusa, a wyvern’s 
lethal   venom,   and   a   harpy’s   compelling   song.   Luckily,   a   tough   
adventurer can survive these threats, too. 
Generally,  when  you  are  subject  to  an  unusual  or  magical  attack,  
you  get  a  saving  throw  to  avoid  or  reduce  the  effect.  Like  an  attack  
roll,  a  saving  throw  is  a  d20  roll  plus  a  bonus  based  on  your  class,  
level, and an ability score. Your saving throw modifier is: 
 
Base save bonus + ability modifier 
 
Saving Throw Types: The three different kinds of saving throws 
are Fortitude, Reflex, and Will: 
Fortitude: These saves measure your ability to stand up to physical 
punishment  or  attacks  against  your  vitality  and  health.  Apply  your  
Constitution  modifier  to  your  Fortitude  saving  throws.  Fortitude  
saves  can  be  made  against  attacks  or  effects  such  as  poison,  disease,  
paralysis, petrification, energy drain, and disintegrate. 
Reflex:  These  saves  test  your  ability  to  dodge  area  attacks.  Apply  
your  Dexterity  modifier  to  your  Reflex  saving  throws.    Reflex  saves  
can  be  made  against  attacks  or  effects  such  as  pit  traps,  catching  on  
fire, fireball, lighting bolt, and red dragon breath. 
Will:  These  saves  reflect  your  resistance  to  mental  influence  as  
well  as  many  magical  effects.  Apply  your  Wisdom  modifier  to  your  
Will saving throws. Will saves can be made against attacks or effects 
such as charm person, hold person, and most illusion spells. 
Saving Throw Difficulty Class: The DC for a save is determined 
by the attack itself. Two examples: A Medium monstrous centipede’s 
poison  allows  a  DC  11  Fortitude  save.  An  ancient  red  dragon’s  fiery  
breath allows a DC 36 Reflex save. 
Automatic Failures and Successes: A natural 1 (the d20 comes 
up 1) on a saving throw is always a failure (and may cause damage to 
exposed items; see Items Surviving after a Saving Throw, page 177). 
A natural 20 (the d20 comes up 20) is always a success. 
 
INITIATIVE 
Every round, each combatant gets to do something. The combatants’ 
initiative  checks,  from  highest  to  lowest,  determine  the  order  in  
which they act. 
Initiative Checks: At the start of a battle, each combatant makes 
an  initiative  check.  An  initiative  check  is  a  Dexterity  check.  Each  
character  applies  his  or  her  Dexterity  modifier  to  the  roll.  The  DM  
finds  out  what  order  characters  are  acting  in,  counting  down  from  
highest  result  to  lowest,  and  each  character  acts  in  turn.  In  every  
round  that  follows,  the  characters  act  in  the  same  order  (unless  a  
character   takes   an   action   that   results   in   his   or   her   initiative   
changing; see Special Initiative Actions, page 160). Usually, the DM 
writes  the  names  of  the  characters  down  in  initiative  order  so  that  
on  subsequent  rounds  he  can  move  quickly  from  one  character  to  
the  next.  If  two  or  more  combatants  have  the  same  initiative  check  
result,  the  combatants  who  are  tied  act  in  order  of  total  initiative  
modifier  (highest  first).  If  there  is  still  a  tie,  the  tied  characters  
should  roll  again  to  determine  which  one  of  them  goes  before  the  
other. 
Monster  Initiative:  Typically,  the  DM  makes  a  single  initiative  
checks for monsters and other opponents. That way, each player gets 
a  turn  each  round  and  the  DM  also  gets  one  turn.  At  the  DM’s  
option, however, he can make separate initiative checks for different 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
137
groups  of  monsters  or  even  for  individual  creatures.  For  instance,  
the  DM  may  make  one  initiative  checks  for  an  evil  cleric  of  Nerull  
and another check for all seven of her zombie guards. 
Flat-Footed: At the start of a battle, before you have had a chance 
to  act  (specifically,  before  your  first  regular  turn  in  the  initiative  
order), you are flat-footed. You can’t use your Dexterity bonus to AC 
(if any) while flat-footed. (This fact can be very bad for you if you’re 
attacked by rogues.) Barbarians and rogues have the uncanny dodge 
extraordinary   ability,   which   allows   them   to   avoid   losing   their   
Dexterity   bonus   to   AC   due   to   being   flat-footed.   A   flat-footed   
character can’t make attacks of opportunity. 
Inaction:  Even  if  you  can’t  take  actions  (for  instance,  if  you  
become  paralysed  or  unconscious),  you  retain  your  initiative  score  
for the duration of the encounter. For example, when paralysed by a 
ghoul,  you  may  miss  one  or  more  actions,  but  once  the  cleric  casts  
remove paralysis on you, you may act again on your next turn. 
 
SURPRISE 
When  a  combat  starts,  if  you  are  not  aware  of  your  opponents  and  
they are aware of you, you’re surprised. 
 
Determining Awareness 
Sometimes  all  the  combatants  on  a  side  are  aware  of  their  oppo-
nents,  sometimes  none  are,  and  sometimes  only  some  of  them  are.  
Sometimes  a  few  combatants  on  each  side  are  aware  and  the  other  
combatants on each side are unaware. 
The DM determines who is aware of whom at the start of a battle. 
He  may  call  for  Listen  checks,  Spot  checks,  or  other  checks  to  see  
how  aware  the  adventurers  are  of  their  opponents.  Some  example  
situations: 
 The  party  (including  Tordek,  a  fighter,  and  Jozan,  a  cleric,  clang-
ing along in metal armor) comes to a door in a dungeon. The DM 
knows  that  the  displacer  beasts  beyond  the  door  hear  the  party.  
Lidda  listens  at  the  door,  hears  guttural  snarling,  and  warns  the  
rest  of  the  party.  Tordek  breaks  the  door  open.  Both  sides  are  
aware;  neither  is  surprised.  The  characters  and  displacer  beasts  
make initiative checks, and the battle begins. 
 The  party  explores  a  ruined  armory,  looking  through  the  rusted  
weapons  for  anything  of  value.  Kobolds  lurk  in  the  nooks  and  
crannies,  waiting  for  the  right  time  to  strike.  Jozan  spots  one  of  
the kobolds, and the kobolds shriek and charge. The kobolds and 
Jozan   each   get   a   standard   action   during   the   surprise   round.   
Kobolds that are close enough can charge adventurers and attack 
them.  Others  can  move  to  try  to  put  themselves  in  advantageous  
positions  or  shoot  arrows  at  the  flat-footed  party  members.  Jozan  
can  cast  a  spell,  attack,  or  take  some  other  action.  After  the  
surprise round, the first regular round begins. 
 The  party  advances  down  a  dark  corridor,  using  light spells to see 
where they’re going. At the end of the corridor, outside the range 
of   the   illumination,   a   kobold   sorcerer   doesn’t   want   to   be   
disturbed, and she angrily casts a lightning bolt. That’s the surprise 
round.  After  the  lightning bolt, the first regular round begins with 
the  party  in  a  tough  spot,  since  they  still  can’t  see  who  attacked  
them. 
The  Surprise  Round:  If  some  but  not  all  of  the  combatants  are  
aware  of  their  opponents,  a  surprise  round  happens  before  regular  
rounds begin. Any combatants aware of the opponents can act in the 
surprise round, so they roll for initiative. In initiative order (highest 
to   lowest),   combatants   who   started   the   battle   aware   of   their   
opponents  each  take  a  standard  action  during  the  surprise  round  
(see  Standard  Actions,  page  139).  You  can  also  take  free  actions  
during  the  surprise  round,  at  the  DM’s  discretion.  If  no  one  or  
everyone is surprised, no surprise round occurs. 
Unaware Combatants: Combatants who are unaware at the start 
of battle don’t get to act in the surprise round. Unaware combatants 
are  flat-footed  because  they  have  not  acted  yet,  so  they  lose  any  
Dexterity bonus to AC. 
ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY 
The   melee   combat   rules   assume   that   combatants   are   actively   
avoiding  attacks.  A  player  doesn’t  have  to  declare  anything  special  
for   her   character   to   be   on   the   defensive.   Even   if   a   character’s   
miniature figure is just standing there on the battle grid, you can be 
sure  that  if  some  orc  with  a  falchion  attacks  the  character,  she  is  
weaving,  dodging,  and  even  threatening  the  orc  with  a  weapon  to  
keep the orc a little worried for his own hide. 
Sometimes, however, a combatant in a melee lets her guard down. 
In  this  case,  combatants  near  her  can  take  advantage  of  her  lapse  in  
defense to attack her for free. These free attacks are called attacks of 
opportunity (see the diagram on the next page). 
Threatened  Squares:  You  threaten  all  squares  into  which  you  
can make a melee attack, even when it is not your action. Generally, 
that   means   everything   in   all   squares   adjacent   to   your   space   
(including diagonally). An enemy that takes certain actions while in 
a  threatened  square  provokes  an  attack  of  opportunity  from  you.  If  
you’re  unarmed,  you  don’t  normally  threaten  any  squares  and  thus  
can’t  make  attacks  of  opportunity  (but  see  Unarmed  Attacks,  page  
139). 
Reach  Weapons:  Most  creatures  of  Medium  or  smaller  size  have  a  
reach  of  only  5  feet.  This  means  that  they  can  make  melee  attacks  
only  against  creatures  up  to  5  feet  (1  square)  away.  However,  Small  
and Medium creatures wielding reach weapons (such as a longspear) 
threaten   more   squares   than   a   typical   creature.   For   instance,   a   
longspear-wielding  human  threatens  all  squares  10  feet  (2  squares)  
away, even diagonally. (This is an exception to the rule that 2 squares 
of  diagonal  distance  is  measured  as  15  feet.)  In  addition,  most  
creatures  larger  than  Medium  have  a  natural  reach  of  10  feet  or  
more; see Big and Little Creatures in Combat, page 149. 
Provoking an Attack of Opportunity: Two kinds of actions can 
provoke  attacks  of  opportunity:  moving  out  of  a  threatened  square  
and performing an action within a threatened square. 
Moving:  Moving  out  of  a  threatened  square  usually  provokes  an  
attack of opportunity from the threatening opponent. There are two 
common  methods  of  avoiding  such  an  attack—the  5-foot-step  (see  
page 144) and the withdraw action (see page 143). 
Performing  a  Distracting  Act:  Some  actions,  when  performed  in  a  
threatened square, provoke attacks of opportunity as you divert your 
attention from the battle. Casting a spell and attacking with a ranged 
weapon,  for  example,  are  distracting  actions.  Table  8–2:  Actions  in  
Combat  notes  many  of  the  actions  that  provoke  attacks  of  oppor-
tunity. 
Remember  that  even  actions  that  normally  provoke  attacks  of  
opportunity  may  have  exceptions  to  this  rule.  For  instance,  a  char-
acter with the Improved Unarmed Strike feat doesn’t incur an attack 
of opportunity for making an unarmed attack. 
Making  an  Attack  of  Opportunity: An attack of opportunity is 
a  single  melee  attack,  and  you  can  only  make  one  per  round.  You  
don’t have to make an attack of opportunity if you don’t want to. 
An  experienced  character  gets  additional  regular  melee  attacks  
(by  using  the  full  attack  action),  but  at  a  lower  attack  bonus.  You  
make  your  attack  of  opportunity,  however,  at  your  normal  attack  
bonus—even if you’ve already attacked in the round. 
An  attack  of  opportunity  “interrupts”  the  normal  flow  of  actions  
in  the  round.  If  an  attack  of  opportunity  is  provoked,  immediately  
resolve  the  attack  of  opportunity,  then  continue  with  the  next  
character’s  turn  (or  complete  the  current  turn,  if  the  attack  of  
opportunity was provoked in the midst of a character’s turn). 
Combat  Reflexes  and  Additional  Attacks  of  Opportunity:  If  you  have  
the  Combat  Reflexes  feat  (page  92),  you  can  add  your  Dexterity  
modifier to the number of attacks of opportunity you can make in a 
round.  This  feat  does  not  let  you  make  more  than  one  attack  for  a  
given opportunity, but if the same opponent provokes two attacks of 
opportunity  from  you—such  as  by  moving  out  of  a  threatened  
square  and  then  casting  a  spell  in  a  threatened  square—you  could  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
138 
make two separate attacks of opportunity (since each one represents 
a   different   opportunity).   Moving   out   of   more   than   one   square   
threatened  by  the  same  opponent  in  the  same  round  doesn’t  count  
as  more  than  one  opportunity  for  that  opponent.  All  these  attacks  
are at your full normal attack bonus. 
 
ACTIONS IN COMBAT 
The  fundamental  actions  of  moving,  attacking,  and  casting  spells  
cover  most  of  what  you  want  to  do  in  a  battle.  They’re  all  described  
here.  Other,  more  specialized  options  are  covered  later  in  Special  
Attacks, page 154, and Special Initiative Actions, page 160. 
 
THE COMBAT ROUND 
Each  round  represents  6  seconds  in  the  game  world.  At  the  table,  a  
round  presents  an  opportunity  for  each  character  involved  in  a  
combat   situation   to   take   an   action.   Anything   a   person   could   
reasonably do in 6 seconds, your character can do in 1 round. 
Each  round’s  activity  begins  with  the  character  with  the  highest  
initiative result and then proceeds, in order, from there. Each round 
of  a  combat  uses  the  same  initiative  order.  When  a  character’s  turn  
comes  up  in  the  initiative  sequence,  that  character  performs  his  
entire  round’s  worth  of  actions.  (For  exceptions,  see  Attacks  of  
Opportunity, page 137, and Special Initiative Actions, page 160.) 
For  almost  all  purposes,  there  is  no  relevance  to  the  end  of  a  
round or the beginning of a round. The term “round” works like the 
word “month.” A month can mean either a calendar month or a span 
of time from a day in one month to the same day the next month. In 
the  same  way,  a  round  can  be  a  segment  of  game  time  starting  with  
the  first  character  to  act  and  ending  with  the  last,  but  it  usually  
means a span of time from one round to the same initiative count in 
the next round. Effects that last a certain number of rounds end just 
before the same initiative count that they began on. 
For  example,  a  monk  acts  on  initiative  count  15.  The  monk’s  
stunning attack stuns a creature for 1 round. The stun lasts through 
initiative  count  16  in  the  next  round,  not  until  the  end  of  the  
current  round.  On  initiative  count  15  in  the  next  round,  the  stun  
effect has ended and the previously stunned creature can act. 
 
ACTION TYPES 
An  action’s  type  essentially  tells  you  how  long  the  action  takes  to  
perform  (within  the  framework  of  the  6-second  combat  round)  and  
how  movement  is  treated.  There  are  four  types  of  actions:  standard  
actions, move actions, full-round actions, and free actions. 
In a normal round, you can perform a standard action and a move 
action, or you can perform a full-round action. You can also perform 
as many free actions (see below) as your DM allows. You can always 
take a move action in place of a standard action. 
In  some  situations  (such  as  in  a  surprise  round),  you  may  be  
limited to taking only a single move action or standard action. 
Standard Action: A standard action allows you to do something. 
The  most  common  type  of  standard  action  is  an  attack—a  single  
melee  or  ranged  attack.  Other  common  standard  actions  including  
casting a spell, concentrating to maintain an active spell, activating a 
magic  item,  and  using  a  special  ability.  See  Table  8–2:  Actions  in  
Combat for other standard actions. 
Move  Action:  A  move  action  allows  you  to  move  your  speed  or  
perform an action that takes a similar amount of time. You can move 
your speed, climb one-quarter of your speed, draw or stow a weapon 
or   other   item,   stand   up,   pick   up   an   object,   or   perform   some   
equivalent action (see Table 8–2: Actions in Combat). 
You  can  take  a  move  action  in  place  of  a  standard  action.  For  in-
stance,  rather  than  moving  your  speed  and  attacking,  you  could  
stand  up  and  move  your  speed  (two  move  actions),  put  away  a  
weapon and climb one-quarter of your speed (two move actions), or 
pick up an item and stow it in your backpack (two move actions). 
If  you  move  no  actual  distance  in  a  round  (commonly  because  
you  have  swapped  your  move  for  one  or  more  equivalent  actions,  
such  as  standing  up),  you  can  take  one  5-foot  step  either  before,  
during, or after the action. For example, if Tordek is on the ground, 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
139
he can stand up (a move action), move 5 feet (a 5-foot step), and then 
attack. 
Full-Round Action: A full-round action consumes all your effort 
during  a  round.  The  only  movement  you  can  take  during  a  full-
round  action  is  a  5-foot  step  before,  during,  or  after  the  action.  You  
can  also  perform  free  actions  (see  below)  as  your  DM  allows.  The  
most common type of full-round action is a full attack, which allows 
you to make multiple melee or ranged attacks in a single round. 
Some full-round actions do not allow you to take a 5-foot step. 
Some full-round actions can be taken as standard actions, but only 
in  situations  when  you  are  limited  to  performing  only  a  standard  
action   during   your   round   (such   as   in   a   surprise   round).   The   
descriptions  of  specific  actions,  below,  detail  which  actions  allow  
this option. 
Free  Action:  Free  actions  consume  a  very  small  amount  of  time  
and  effort,  and  over  the  span  of  the  round,  their  impact  is  so  minor  
that  they  are  considered  free.  You  can  perform  one  or  more  free  
actions  while  taking  another  action  normally.  However,  the  DM  
puts  reasonable  limits  on  what  you  can  really  do  for  free.  For  in-
stance,  calling  out  to  your  friends  for  help,  dropping  an  object,  and  
ceasing to concentrate on a spell are all free actions. 
Not  an  Action:  Some  activities  are  so  minor  that  they  are  not  
even considered free actions. They literally don’t take any time at all 
to  do  and  are  considered  an  inherent  part  of  doing  something  else.  
For  instance,  using  the  Use  Magic  Device  skill  (page  85)  while  
trying  to  activate  a  device  is  not  an  action,  it  is  part  of  the  standard  
action to activate a magic item. 
Restricted  Activity:  In  some  situations  (such  as  when  you’re  
slowed  or  during  a  surprise  round),  you  may  be  unable  to  take  a  full  
round’s  worth  of  actions.  In  such  cases,  you  are  restricted  to  taking  
only  a  single  standard  action  or  a  single  move  action  (plus  free  
actions  as  normal).  You  can’t  take  a  full-round  action  (though  you  
can start or complete a full-round action by using a standard action; 
see below). 
 
STANDARD ACTIONS 
Most  standard  actions  involve  making  an  attack,  casting  a  spell,  or  
activating  an  item.  These  are  the  most  common,  straightforward  
actions  that  a  character  might  take  in  a  combat  round.  More  spe-
cialized actions are covered in Special Attacks, page 154. 
 
Attack 
Making an attack is a standard action. 
Melee Attacks: With a normal melee weapon, you can strike any 
opponent  within  5  feet.  (Opponents  within  5  feet  are  considered  
adjacent  to  you.)  Some  melee  weapons  have  reach,  as  indicated  in  
their  descriptions  in  Chapter  7:  Equipment.  With  a  typical  reach  
weapon,  you  can  strike  opponents  10  feet  away,  but  you  can’t  strike  
adjacent foes (those within 5 feet). 
Unarmed Attacks: Striking for damage with punches, kicks, and 
head  butts  is  much  like  attacking  with  a  melee  weapon,  except  for  
the following: 
Attacks  of  Opportunity:  Attacking  unarmed  provokes  an  attack  of  
opportunity  from  the  character  you  attack,  provided  she  is  armed.  
The  attack  of  opportunity  comes  before  your  attack.  An  unarmed  
attack  does  not  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity  from  other  foes,  as  
shooting  a  bow  does,  nor  does  it  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  
from  an  unarmed  foe.  You  provoke  the  attack  of  opportunity  be-
cause you have to bring your body close to your opponent. 
An  unarmed  character  can’t  take  attacks  of  opportunity  (but  see  
“Armed” Unarmed Attacks, below). 
“Armed”  Unarmed  Attacks:  Sometimes  a  character’s  or  creature’s  
unarmed attack counts as an armed attack. A monk, a character with 
the Improved Unarmed Strike feat (page 96), a spellcaster delivering 
a  touch  attack  spell,  and  a  creature  with  claws,  fangs,  and  similar  
natural  physical  weapons  all  count  as  being  armed.  Note  that  being  
armed  counts  for  both  offense  and  defense.  Not  only  does  a  monk  
not provoke an attack opportunity when attacking an armed foe, but 
you  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  from  a  monk  if  you  make  an  
unarmed attack against her. 
Unarmed   Strike   Damage:   An   unarmed   strike   from   a   Medium   
character  deals  1d3  points  of  damage  (plus  your  Strength  modifier,  
as  normal).  A  Small  character’s  unarmed  strike  deals  1d2  points  of  
damage, while a Large character’s unarmed strike deals 1d4 points of 
damage.  All  damage  from  unarmed  strikes  is  nonlethal  damage.  
Unarmed   strikes   count   as   light   weapons   (for   purposes   of   two-
weapon attack penalties and so on). 
Dealing  Lethal  Damage:  You  can  specify  that  your  unarmed  strike  
will  deal  lethal  damage  before  you  make  your  attack  roll,  but  you  
take  a  –4  penalty  on  your  attack  roll  because  you  have  to  strike  a  
particularly  vulnerable  spot  to  deal  lethal  damage.  .  If  you  have  the  
Improved  Unarmed  Strike  feat,  you  can  deal  lethal  damage  with  an  
unarmed strike without taking a penalty on the attack roll. 
Ranged Attacks: With a ranged weapon, you can shoot or throw 
at any target that is within the weapon’s maximum range and in line 
of  sight.  The  maximum  range  for  a  thrown  weapon  is  five  range  
increments. For projectile weapons, it is ten range increments. Some 
ranged weapons have shorter maximum ranges, as specified in their 
descriptions. 
Attack  Rolls:  An  attack  roll  represents  your  attempts  to  strike  
your opponent. It does not represent a single swing of the sword, for 
example.  Rather,  it  indicates  whether,  over  several  attempts  in  the  
round, you managed to connect solidly. 
Your  attack  roll  is  1d20  +  your  attack  bonus  with  the  weapon  
you’re using. If the result is at least as high as the target’s AC, you hit 
and deal damage. 
Automatic  Misses  and  Hits:  A  natural  1  (the  d20  comes  up  1)  
on  the  attack  roll  is  always  a  miss.  A  natural  20  (the  d20  comes  up  
20) is always a hit. A natural 20 is also a threat—a possible critical hit 
(see the Critical Hits sidebar, page 140). 
Damage  Rolls:  If  the  attack  roll  result  equals  or  exceeds  the  
target’s AC, the attack hits and you deal damage. Roll the appropriate 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
140 
damage for your weapon (see Table 7–5: Weapon, page 116). Damage 
is deducted from the target’s current hit points. If the opponent’s hit 
points  drop  to  0  or  lower,  he’s  in  bad  shape  (see  Injury  and  Death,  
page 145). 
Multiple  Attacks:  A  character  who  can  make  more  than  one  
attack  per  round  must  use  the  full  attack  action  (see  Full-Round  
Actions, below) in order to get more than one attack. 
Shooting  or  Throwing  into  a  Melee:  If  you  shoot  or  throw  a  
ranged  weapon  at  a  target  engaged  in  melee  with  a  friendly  char-
acter,  you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  your  attack  roll  because  you  have  to  
aim   carefully   to   avoid   hitting   your   friend.   Two   characters   are   
engaged  in  melee  if  they  are  enemies  of  each  other  and  either  
threatens  the  other.  (An  unconscious  or  otherwise  immobilized  
character  is  not  considered  engaged  unless  he  is  actually  being  
attacked.) 
If  your  target  (or  the  part  of  your  target  you’re  aiming  at,  if  it’s  a  
big target) is at least 10 feet away from the nearest friendly character, 
you can avoid the –4 penalty, even if the creature you’re aiming at is 
engaged in melee with a friendly character. 
Precise  Shot:  If  you  have  the  Precise  Shot  feat  (page  98),  you  don’t  
take this penalty. 
Fighting Defensively as a Standard Action: You can choose to 
fight defensively when attacking. If you do so, you take a –4 penalty 
on all attacks in a round to gain a +2 dodge bonus to AC for the same 
round. This bonus stacks with the AC bonus granted by the Combat 
Expertise feat (page 92). 
 
Cast a Spell 
Most  spells  require  1  standard  action  to  cast.  You  can  cast  such  a  
spell  either  before  or  after  you  take  a  move  action.  See  Chapter  10:  
magic for details on casting spells, their effects, and so on. 
Note: You retain your Dexterity bonus to AC while casting. 
Spell Components: To cast a spell with a verbal (V) component, 
your character must speak in a firm voice. If you’re gagged or in the 
area  of  a  silence  spell,  you  can’t  cast  such  a  spell.  A  spellcaster  who  
has been deafened has a 20% chance to spoil any spell he tries to cast 
if that spell has a verbal component. 
To  cast  a  spell  with  a  somatic  (S)  component,  you  must  gesture  
freely with at least one hand. You can’t cast a spell of this type while 
bound,   grappling,   or   with   both   your   hands   full   or   occupied   
(swimming, clinging to a cliff, or the like). 
To cast a spell with a material (M), focus (F), or divine focus (DF) 
component,  you  have  to  have  the  proper  materials,  as  described  by  
the spell. Unless these materials are elaborate, such as the 2-foot-by-
4-boot  mirror  that  a  wizard  needs  to  cast  scrying,  preparing  these  
materials  is  a  free  action.  For  material  components  and  focuses  
whose costs are not listed, you can assume that you have them if you 
have your spell component pouch. 
Some spells have an experience point (XP) component and entail 
an  experience  point  cost  to  you.  No  spell,  not  even  restoration,  can  
restore  the  lost  XP.  You  cannot  spend  so  much  XP  that  you  lose  a  
level,  so  you  cannot  cast  the  spell  unless  you  have  enough  XP  to  
spare.  However,  you  may,  on  gaining  enough  XP  to  achieve  a  new  
level,  immediately  spend  the  XP  on  casting  the  spell  rather  than  
keeping  it  to  advance  a  level.  The  XP  are  expended  when  you  cast  
the spell, whether or not the casting succeeds. 
Concentration: You must concentrate to cast a spell. If you can’t 
concentrate (because you are on the deck of a storm-tossed ship, for 
instance),  you  can’t  cast  a  spell.  If  you  start  casting  a  spell  but  
something   interferes   with   your   concentration,   such   as   an   ogre   
taking  the  opportunity  to  hit  you  with  its  club  (successfully  hitting  
you with his attack of opportunity), you must make a Concentration 
check   or   lose   the   spell.   The   check’s   DC   depends   on   what   is   
threatening  your  concentration  (see  the  Concentration  skill,  page  
69, and Concentration, page 170). If you fail, the spell fizzles with no 
effect.  If  you  prepare  spells  (as  a  wizard,  cleric,  druid,  paladin,  or  
ranger  does),  it  is  lost  from  preparation.  If  you  cast  at  will  (as  a  
sorcerer  or  bard  does),  it  counts  against  your  daily  limit  of  spells  
even though you did not cast it successfully. 
Concentrating  to  Maintain  a  Spell:  Some  spells  require  con-
tinued  concentration  to  keep  them  going.  Concentrating  to  main-
tain  a  spell  is  a  standard  action  that  doesn’t  provoke  an  attack  of  
opportunity.  Anything  that  could  break  your  concentration  when  
casting a spell can keep you from concentrating to maintain a spell. 
If your concentration breaks, the spell ends. 
Casting  Time:  Most  spells  have  a  casting  time  of  1  standard  
action. A spell cast in this manner immediately takes effect. 
Attacks   of   Opportunity:   Generally,   if   you   cast   a   spell,   you   
provoke  attacks  of  opportunity  from  threatening  enemies.  If  you  
take   damage   from   an   attack   of   opportunity,   you   must   make   a   
Concentration check (DC 10 + points of damage taken + spell level) 
or lose the spell. Spells that require only a free action to cast (such as 
feather  fall  or  any  quickened  spell)  don’t  provoke  attacks  of  oppor-
tunity. 
Casting on the Defensive: You may attempt to cast a spell while 
paying attention to threats and avoiding blows. In this case, you are 
no more vulnerable to attack than you would be if you were just 
standing  there,  so  casting  a  spell  while  on  the  defensive  does  not  
provoke   an   attack   of   opportunity.   It   does,   however,   require   a   
Concentration check (DC 15 + spell level) to pull off. Failure means 
that you lose the spell. 
Touch Spells in Combat: Many spells have a range of touch. To 
use these spells, you cast the spell and then touch the subject, either 
in the same round or any time later. In the same round that you cast 
the  spell,  you  may  also  touch  (or  attempt  to  touch)  the  target.  You  
may  take  your  move  before  casting  the  spell,  after  touching  the  
CRITICAL HITS 
When you make an attack roll and get a natural 20 (the d20 shows 20),
you  hit  regardless  of  your  target’s  Armor  Class,  and  you  have  scored  a
threat. The hit might be a critical hit (or “crit”). To find out if it’s a critical
hit, you immediately make a critical roll—another attack roll with all the
same  modifiers  as  the  attack  roll  you  
just  made.  If  the  critical  roll  also
results in a hit against the target’s AC, your original hit is a critical hit.
(The  critical  roll  
just  needs  to  hit  to  give  you  a  crit.  It  doesn’t  need  to
come  up  20  again.)  If  the  critical  roll  is  a  miss,  then  your  hit  is  
just  a
regular hit. 
A critical hit means that you roll your damage more than once, with all 
your  usual  bonuses,  and  add  the  rolls  together.  Unless  otherwise
specified, the threat range for a critical hit on an attack roll is 20, and the
multiplier is ×2. 
Exception: Extra damage over and above a weapon’s normal damage,
such  as  that  dealt  by  a  sneak  attack  or  the  special  ability  of  a  flaming  
sword, is not multiplied when you score a critical hit. 
Increased Threat Range:Sometimes your threat range is greater than 
20. That is, you can score a threat on a lower number. Longswords, for 
instance, give  you  a  thread  on  a  natural  attack  roll  of  19  or  20.  In  such  
cases, a roll of lower than 20 is not an automatic hit. Any attack roll that 
doesn’t result in a hit is not a threat. 
Increased  Critical  Multiplier:  Some  weapons,  such  as  battleaxes  and
arrows, deal better than double damage on a critical hit. See Table 7–5: 
Weapons (page 116) and the Critical section of Weapon Qualities (page 
114). 
Spells  and  Critical  Hits:A  spell  that  requires  an  attack  roll,  such  as  
shocking grasp or Melf’s acid arrow, can score a critical hit. A spell attack 
that requires no attack roll, such as lightning bolt, cannot score a critical 
hit. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
141
target, or between casting the spell and touching the target. You can 
automatically  touch  one  friend  or  use  the  spell  on  yourself,  but  to  
touch an opponent, you must succeed on an attack roll. 
Touch Attacks: Since you need only touch your enemy, you make a 
touch attack instead of a regular attack. Touching an opponent with 
a touch spell is considered to be an armed attack and therefore does 
not  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity.  The  touch  spell  provides  you  
with  a  credible  threat  that  the  defender  is  obliged  to  take  into  
account  just  as  if  it  were  a  weapon.  However,  the  act  of  casting  a  
spell does provoke an attack of opportunity, so you may want to cast 
the  spell  and  then  move  to  the  target  instead  of  vice  versa.  Touch  
attacks  come  in  two  types:  melee  touch  attacks  (for  touches  made  
with,  say,  your  hand)  and  ranged  touch  attacks  (for  touches  made  
with magic rays, for example). You can score critical hits with either 
type  of  attack.  Your  opponent’s  AC  against  a  touch  attack  does  not  
include any armor bonus, shield bonus, or natural armor bonus. His 
size  modifier,  Dexterity  modifier,  and  deflection  bonus  (if  any)  all  
apply normally. 
Holding  the  Charge:  If  you  don’t  discharge  the  spell  in  the  round  
when  you  cast  the  spell,  you  can  hold  the  discharge  of  the  spell  
(hold  the  charge)  indefinitely.  You  can  continue  to  make  touch  
attacks  round  after  round.  You  can  touch  one  friend  as  a  standard  
action  or  up  to  six  friends  as  a  full-round  action.  If  you  touch  
anything  or  anyone  while  holding  a  charge,  even  unintentionally,  
the   spell   discharges.   If   you   cast   another   spell,   the   touch   spell   
dissipates. Alternatively, you may make a normal unarmed attack (or 
Table 8–2: Actions in Combat 
                                                                                                     Attack                                                                                                     of                                                                                                     
Standard Action Opportunity
1
 
Attack (melee) No 
Attack (ranged) Yes 
Attack (unarmed) Yes 
Activate a magic item other than a potion or oil No 
Aid another (page 154) Maybe
2
 
Bull rush (page 154) No 
Cast a spell (1 standard action casting time) Yes 
Concentrate to maintain an active spell No 
Dismiss a spell No 
Draw a hidden weapon (see Sleight of Hand, page 81) No 
Drink a potion or apply an oil Yes 
Escape a grapple (page 156) No 
Feint (page 155) No 
Light a torch with a tindertwig (page 129) Yes 
Lower spell resistance No 
Make a dying friend stable (see Heal, page 75) Yes 
Overrun (page 157) No 
Read a scroll Yes 
Ready (triggers a standard action) No 
Sunder a weapon (attack) Yes 
Sunder an object (attack) Maybe
3
 
Total defense No 
Turn or rebuke undead (page 159) No 
Use extraordinary ability No 
Use skill that takes 1 action Usually 
Use spell-like ability Yes 
Use supernatural ability No 
 
                                                                                                     Attack                                                                                                     of                                                                                                     
Move Action Opportunity
1
 
Move                                                                                                Yes                                                                                                
Control a frightened mount Yes 
Direct or redirect an active spell No 
Draw a weapon
4
                                                                               No                                                                               
Load a hand crossbow or light crossbow Yes 
Open or close a door No 
Mount a horse or dismount No 
Move a heavy object Yes 
Pick up an item Yes 
Sheathe a weapon Yes 
Stand up from prone Yes 
Ready or loose a shield
4
                                                                  No                                                                  
Retrieve a stored item Yes 
 
                                                                                                     Attack                                                                                                     of                                                                                                     
Full-Round Action Opportunity
1
 
Full attack No 
Charge
5
 (page 154) No 
Deliver coup de grace (page 153) Yes 
Escape from a net (page 119) Yes 
 
Extinguish flames No 
Light a torch Yes 
Load a heavy or repeating crossbow Yes 
Lock or unlock weapon in locked gauntlet Yes 
Prepare to throw splash weapon (page 158) Yes 
Run                                                                                                   Yes                                                                                                   
Use skill that takes 1 round Usually 
Use touch spell on up to six friends (page 141) Yes 
Withdraw
5
                                                                                        No                                                                                        
 
                                                                                                     Attack                                                                                                     of                                                                                                     
Free Action Opportunity
1
 
Cast a quickened spell (page 98) No 
Cease concentration on a spell No 
Drop an item No 
Drop to the floor No 
Prepare spell components to cast a spell
6
                                     No                                     
Speak                                                                                                No                                                                                                
 
                                                                                                     Attack                                                                                                     of                                                                                                     
No Action Opportunity
1
 
Delay                                                                                                No                                                                                                
5-foot step No 
 
Action Type Varies 
Disarm
7
 (page 155) Yes 
Grapple
7
 (page 155) Yes 
Trip an opponent
7
 (page 158) No 
Use feat
8
                                                                                        Varies                                                                                        
 
1 Regardless of the action, if you move out of a threatened square, you 
usually provoke an attack of opportunity. This column indicates 
whether the action itself, not moving, provokes an attack of 
opportunity. 
2 If you aid someone performing an action that would normally 
provoke an attack of opportunity, then the act of aiding another 
provokes an attack of opportunity as well. 
3 If the object is being held, carried, or worn by a creature, yes. If not, 
no. 
4 If you have a base attack bonus of +1 or higher, you can combine 
one of these actions with a regular move. If you have the Two- 
Weapon Fighting feat, you can draw two light or one-handed 
weapons in the time it would normally take you to draw one. 
5 May be taken as a standard action if you are limited to taking only a 
single action in a round. 
6 Unless the component is an extremely large or awkward item (DM’s 
call). 
7 These attack forms substitute for a melee attack, not an action. As 
melee attacks, they can be used once in an attack or charge action, 
one or more times in a full attack action, or even as an attack of 
opportunity. 
8 The description of a feat defines its effect. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
142 
an  attack  with  a  natural  weapon)  while  holding  a  charge.  In  this  
case,   you   aren’t   considered   armed   and   you   provoke   attacks   of   
opportunity  as  normal  for  the  attack.  (If  your  unarmed  attack  or  
natural   weapon   attack   doesn’t   provoke   attacks   of   opportunity,   
neither does this attack.) If the attack hits, you deal normal damage 
for your unarmed attack or natural weapon and the spell discharges. 
If the attack misses, you are still holding the charge. 
Dismiss a Spell: Dismissing an active spell (such as alter self) is a 
standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. 
 
Activate Magic Item 
Many  magic  items  don’t  need  to  be  activated—magic  weapons,  
magic  armor,  gauntlets  of  Dexterity,  and  so  forth.  However,  certain  
magic  items  need  to  be  activated,  especially  potions,  scrolls,  wands,  
rods,  and  staffs.  Activating  a  magic  item  is  a  standard  action  (unless  
the item description indicates otherwise). 
Spell  Completion  Items:  Activating  a  spell  completion  item,  
such  as  a  scroll,  is  the  equivalent  of  casting  a  spell.  It  requires  con-
centration and provokes attacks of opportunity. You lose the spell if 
your  concentration  is  broken,  and  you  can  attempt  to  activate  the  
item  while  on  the  defensive,  as  with  casting  a  spell  (see  Casting  on  
the Defensive, above). 
Spell   Trigger,   Command   Word,   or   Use-Activated   Items: 
Activating  any  of  these  kinds  of  items  does  not  require  concentra-
tion  and  does  not  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity.  The  Dungeon 
Master’s Guide has much more information on magic items. 
 
Use Special Ability 
Using a special ability is usually a standard action, but whether it is a 
standard action, a full-round action, or not an action at all is defined 
by the ability (see Special Abilities, page 180). 
Spell-Like  Abilities:  Using  a  spell-like  ability  (such  as  a  paladin  
calling  her  special  mount)  works  like  casting  a  spell  in  that  it  
requires  concentration  and  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity.  Spell-
like  abilities  can  be  disrupted.  If  your  concentration  is  broken,  the  
attempt  to  use  the  ability  fails,  but  the  attempt  counts  as  if  you  had  
used  the  ability.  The  casting  time  of  a  spell-like  ability  is  1  standard  
action, unless the ability description notes otherwise. 
Using a Spell-Like Ability on the Defensive: You may attempt to use a 
spell-like  ability  on  the  defensive,  just  as  with  casting  a  spell.  If  the  
Concentration  check  (DC  15  +  spell  level)  fails,  you  can’t  use  the  
ability, but the attempt counts as if you had used the ability. 
Supernatural  Abilities:  Using  a  supernatural  ability  (such  as  a  
cleric’s  turn  or  rebuke  undead  ability)  is  usually  a  standard  action  
(unless defined otherwise by the ability’s description). Its use cannot 
be  disrupted,  does  not  require  concentration,  and  does  not  provoke  
attacks of opportunity. 
Extraordinary Abilities: Using an extraordinary ability (such as 
a barbarian’s uncanny dodge ability) is usually not an action because 
most   extraordinary   abilities   automatically   happen   in   a   reactive   
fashion.  Those  extraordinary  abilities  that  are  actions  are  usually  
standard  actions  that  cannot  be  disrupted,  do  not  require  concen-
tration, and do not provoke attacks of opportunity. 
Total Defense 
You  can  defend  yourself  as  a  standard  action.  You  get  a  +4  dodge  
bonus to your AC for 1 round. Your AC improves at the start of this 
action,  so  it  helps  you  against  any  attacks  of  opportunity  you  incur  
during  the  round.  You  can’t  combine  total  defense  with  fighting  
defensively  or  with  the  benefit  of  the  Combat  Expertise  feat  (since  
both  of  those  require  you  to  declare  an  attack  or  full  attack).  You  
can’t make attacks of opportunity while using total defense. 
 
Start/Complete Full-Round Action 
The  “start  full-round  action”  standard  action  lets  you  start  under-
taking a full-round action, which you can complete in the following 
round  by  using  another  standard  action.  For  instance,  if  you  are  
limited  to  taking  only  a  standard  action  each  turn,  you  can  shoot  a  
heavy  crossbow  every  3  rounds,  needing  2  rounds  to  load  it  (a  full-
round action) and 1 round to shoot it. Also, if you want to cast a spell 
whose  casting  time  is  1  full  round,  you  can  start  the  casting  in  one  
round  and  complete  it  in  the  following  round,  for  example.  You  
can’t use this action to start or complete a full attack, charge, run, or 
withdraw. 
 
MOVE ACTIONS 
With  the  exception  of  specific  movement-related  skills,  most  move  
actions don’t require a check. 
 
Move 
The  simplest  move  action  is  moving  your  speed.  If  you  take  this  
kind  of  move  action  during  your  turn,  you  can’t  also  take  a  5-foot  
step. 
Many  nonstandard  modes  of  movement  are  covered  under  this  
category,  including  climbing  (up  to  one-quarter  of  your  speed)  and  
swimming (up to one-quarter of your speed). 
Accelerated  Climbing:  You  can  climb  one-half  your  speed  as  a  
move action by accepting a –5 penalty on your Climb check. 
Crawling: You can crawl 5 feet as a move action. Crawling incurs 
attacks  of  opportunity  from  any  attackers  who  threaten  you  at  any  
point of your crawl. 
 
Draw or Sheathe a Weapon 
Drawing  a  weapon  so  that  you  can  use  it  in  combat,  or  putting  it  
away  so  that  you  have  a  free  hand,  requires  a  move  action.  This  
action also applies to weapon-like objects carried in easy reach, such 
as wands. If your weapon or weapon-like object is stored in a pack or 
otherwise  out  of  easy  reach,  treat  this  action  as  retrieving  a  stored  
item. 
If you have a base attack bonus of +1 or higher, you may draw a 
weapon  as  a  free  action  combined  with  a  regular  move.  If  you  have  
the Two-Weapon Fighting feat (page 102), you can draw two light or 
one-handed weapons in the time it would normally take you to draw 
one. 
Drawing  ammunition  for  use  with  a  ranged  weapon  (such  as  
arrows, bolts, sling bullets, or shuriken) is a free action. 
 
Ready or Loose a Shield 
Strapping a shield to your arm to gain its shield bonus to your AC, or 
unstrapping  and  dropping  a  shield  so  you  can  use  your  shield  hand  
for another purpose, requires a move action. If you have a base attack 
SPEEDING UP COMBAT 
You can use a few tricks to make combat run faster. 
Attack  and  Damage: Roll your attack die and damage die (or dice) at 
the  same  time.  If  you  miss,  you  can  ignore  the  damage,  but  if  you  hit,
your friends don’t have to wait for you to make a second roll for damage.
Multiple  Attacks: Use dice of different colors so you can make your
attack rolls all at once instead of one at a time. Designate which attack is
which color before you roll. 
Dice as Counters: Use dice to keep track of how many rounds a short-
duration magical effect has been active. Each round, turn the die to the 
next number until the effect ends. 
Concealment Rolls:If you know what your chance to miss is because 
of your target’s concealment, you can roll it along with your attack roll. I
f 
the concealment roll indicates a miss, just ignore the attack roll. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
143
bonus of +1 or higher, you can ready or loose a shield as a free action 
combined with a regular move. 
Dropping a carried (but not worn) shield is a free action. 
 
Manipulate an Item 
In  most  cases,  moving  or  manipulating  an  item  is  a  move  action.  
This includes retrieving or putting away a stored item, picking up an 
item,  moving  a  heavy  object,  and  opening  a  door.  Examples  of  this  
kind   of   action,   along   with   whether   they   incur   an   attack   of   
opportunity, are given in Table 8–2: Actions in Combat. 
 
Direct or Redirect a Spell 
Some  spells,  such  as  flaming sphere and spiritual weapon, allow you to 
redirect  the  effect  to  new  targets  or  areas  after  you  cast  the  spell.  
Redirecting  a  spell  requires  a  move  action  and  does  not  provoke  
attacks  of  opportunity  or  require  concentration  (see  Cast  a  Spell  
under Standard Actions, page 140). 
 
Stand Up 
Standing  up  from  a  prone  position  requires  a  move  action  and  pro-
vokes attacks of opportunity. 
 
Mount/Dismount a Steed 
Mounting or dismounting from a steed requires a move action. 
Fast Mount or Dismount: You can mount or dismount as a free 
action  with  a  DC  20  Ride  check  (your  armor  check  penalty,  if  any,  
applies   to   this   check).   If   you   fail   the   check,   mounting   or   dis-
mounting  is  a  move  action  instead.  (You  can’t  attempt  a  fast  mount  
or fast dismount unless you can perform the mount or dismount as a 
move action in the current round.) 
 
FULL-ROUND ACTIONS 
A  full-round  action  requires  an  entire  round  to  complete.  Thus,  it  
can’t  be  coupled  with  a  standard  or  a  move  action,  though  if  it  does  
not involve moving any distance, you can take a 5-foot step. 
 
Full Attack 
If  you  get  more  than  one  attack  per  round  because  your  base  attack  
bonus  is  high  enough,  because  you  fight  with  two  weapons  or  a  
double  weapon  (see  Two-Weapon  Fighting  under  Special  Attacks,  
page 160), or for some special reason (such as a feat or a magic item) 
you  must  use  a  full-round  action  to  get  your  additional  attacks.  You  
do not need to specify the targets of your attacks ahead of time. You 
can  see  how  the  earlier  attacks  turn  out  before  assigning  the  later  
ones. 
The  only  movement  you  can  take  during  a  full  attack  is  a  5-foot  
step. You may take the step before, after, or between your attacks. 
If you get multiple attacks because your base attack bonus is high 
enough,  you  must  make  the  attacks  in  order  from  highest  bonus  to  
lowest.  If  you  are  using  two  weapons,  you  can  strike  with  either  
weapon  first.  If  you  are  using  a  double  weapon,  you  can  strike  with  
either part of the weapon first. 
Deciding  between  an  Attack  or  a  Full  Attack:  After  your  first  
attack, you can decide to take a move action instead of making your 
remaining  attacks,  depending  on  how  the  first  attack  turns  out.  If  
you’ve already taken a 5-foot step, you can’t use your move action to 
move  any  distance,  but  you  could  still  use  a  different  kind  of  move  
action. 
Fighting Defensively as a Full-Round Action: You can choose 
to  fight  defensively  when  taking  a  full  attack  action.  If  you  do  so,  
you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  all  attacks  in  a  round  to  gain  a  +2  dodge  
bonus to AC for the same round. 
Cleave:  The  extra  attack  granted  by  the  Cleave  feat  (page  92)  or  
Great  Cleave  feat  (page  94)  can  be  taken  whenever  they  apply.  This  
is an exception to the normal limit to the number of attacks you can 
take when not using a full attack action. 
Cast a Spell 
A spell that takes 1 round to cast is a full-round action. It comes into 
effect  just  before  the  beginning  of  your  turn  in  the  round  after  you  
began  casting  the  spell.  You  then  act  normally  after  the  spell  is  
completed. 
A  spell  that  takes  1  minute  to  cast  comes  into  effect  just  before  
your  turn  1  minute  later  (and  for  each  of  those  10  rounds,  you  are  
casting   a   spell   as   a   full-round   action).   These   actions   must   be   
consecutive and uninterrupted, or the spell automatically fails. 
When  you  begin  a  spell  that  takes  1  round  or  longer  to  cast,  you  
must  continue  the  invocations,  gestures,  and  concentration  from  
one round to just before your turn in the next round (at least). If you 
lose  concentration  after  starting  the  spell  and  before  it  is  complete,  
you lose the spell. 
You only provoke attacks of opportunity when you begin casting 
a spell, even though you might continue casting for at least one full 
round. While casting a spell, you don’t threaten any squares around 
you. 
This  action  is  otherwise  identical  to  the  cast  a  spell  action  de-
scribed under Standard Actions. 
Casting a Metamagic Spell: Sorcerers and bards must take more 
time  to  cast  a  metamagic  spell  (one  enhanced  by  a  metamagic  feat)  
than  a  regular  spell.  If  a  spell’s  normal  casting  time  is  1  standard  
action, casting a metamagic version of the spell is a full-round action 
for a sorcerer or bard. Note that this isn’t the same as a spell with a 1-
round  casting  time—the  spell  takes  effect  in  the  same  round  that  
you   begin   casting,   and   you   aren’t   required   to   continue   the   
invocations,  gestures,  and  concentration  until  your  next  turn.  For  
spells  with  a  longer  casting  time,  it  takes  an  extra  full-round  action  
to cast the metamagic spell. 
Clerics  must  take  more  time  to  spontaneously  cast  a  metamagic  
version  of  a  cure or inflict spell. For instance, an 11th-level cleric can 
swap out a prepared 6th-level spell to cast an empowered cure critical 
wounds. Spontaneously casting a metamagic version of a spell with a 
casting  time  of  1  standard  action  is  a  full-round  action,  and  spells  
with longer casting times take an extra full-round action to cast. 
 
Use Special Ability 
Using a special ability is usually a standard action, but some may be 
full-round  actions,  as  defined  by  the  ability.  See  Special  Abilities,  
page 180, and the Use Special Ability action under Standard Actions, 
page 142. 
 
Withdraw 
Withdrawing  from  melee  combat  is  a  full-round  action.  When  you  
withdraw,  you  can  move  up  to  double  your  speed.  The  square  you  
start  out  in  is  not  considered  threatened  by  any  opponent  you  can  
see,  and  therefore  visible  enemies  do  not  get  attacks  of  opportunity  
against  you  when  you  move  from  that  square.  (Invisible  enemies  
still  get  attacks  of  opportunity  against  you,  and  you  can’t  withdraw  
from  combat  if  you’re  blinded.)  You  can’t  take  a  5-foot  step  during  
the same round in which you withdraw. 
If,   during   the   process   of   withdrawing,   you   move   out   of   a   
threatened  square  (other  than  the  one  you  started  in),  enemies  get  
attacks of opportunity as normal. 
You may not withdraw using a form of movement for which you 
don’t  have  a  listed  speed.  For  example,  a  monstrous  spider  has  a  
listed  climb  speed,  so  it  can  withdraw  by  climbing  away.  Your  
character  doesn’t  normally  have  a  listed  climb  speed  (unless  you’re  
under the effect of a spider climb spell, for example), so you can’t use 
climbing to withdraw from combat. 
Note that despite the name of this action, you don’t actually have 
to  leave  combat  entirely.  For  instance,  you  could  use  a  withdraw  
action to move away from one enemy and toward another. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
144 
 
Restricted  Withdraw:  If  you  are  limited  to  taking  only  a  stan-
dard  action  each  round  (for  instance,  if  you  have  been  slowed  or  
during  a  surprise  round),  you  can  withdraw  as  a  standard  action.  In  
this case, you may move up to your speed (rather than up to double 
your speed). 
 
Run 
You can run as a full-round action. (If you do, you do not also get a 5-
foot step.) When you run, you can move up to four times your speed 
in a straight line (or three times your speed if you’re in heavy armor). 
You  lose  any  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  unless  you  have  the  Run  feat  
(page  99),  which  allows  you  to  keep  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  
when running. 
You  can  run  for  a  number  of  rounds  equal  to  your  Constitution  
score,  but  after  that  you  must  make  a  DC  10  Constitution  check  to  
continue  running.  You  must  check  again  each  round  in  which  you  
continue  to  run,  and  the  DC  of  this  check  increases  by  1  for  each  
check  you  have  made.  When  you  fail  this  check,  you  must  stop  
running. A character who has run to his limit must rest for 1 minute 
(10  rounds)  before  running  again.  During  a  rest  period,  a  character  
can move no faster than a normal move action. 
You can’t run across difficult terrain (page 148), or if you can’t see 
where you’re going. 
A  run  represents  a  speed  of  about  12  miles  per  hour  for  an  unen-
cumbered human. 
 
Move 5 Feet through Difficult Terrain 
In  some  situations,  your  movement  may  be  so  hampered  that  you  
don’t  have  sufficient  speed  even  to  move  5  feet  (a  single  square).  In  
such  a  case,  you  may  spend  a  full-round  action  to  move  5  feet  (1  
square)  in  any  direction,  even  diagonally.  Even  though  this  looks  
like a 5-foot step, it’s not, and thus it provokes attacks of opportunity 
normally.  (You  can’t  take  advantage  of  this  rule  to  move  through  
impassable  terrain  or  to  move  when  all  movement  is  prohibited  to  
you, such as while paralyzed.) 
FREE ACTIONS 
Free  actions  don’t  take  any  time  at  all,  though  your  DM  may  limit  
the  number  of  free  actions  you  can  perform  in  a  turn.  Free  actions  
rarely  incur  attacks  of  opportunity.  Some  common  free  actions  are  
described below. 
 
Drop an Item 
Dropping  an  item  in  your  space  or  into  an  adjacent  square  is  a  free  
action. 
 
Drop Prone 
Dropping to a prone position in your space is a free action. 
 
Speak 
In general, speaking is a free action that you can perform even when 
it  isn’t  your  turn.  Some  DMs  may  rule  that  a  character  can  only  
speak  on  his  turn,  or  that  a  character  can’t  speak  while  flat-footed  
(and thus can’t warn allies of a surprise threat until he has a chance 
to  act).  Speaking  more  than  few  sentences  is  generally  beyond  the  
limit  of  a  free  action;  to  communicate  more  information  than  that,  
your  DM  may  require  that  you  take  a  move  action  or  even  a  full-
round action. 
 
Cease Concentration on Spell 
You can stop concentrating on an active spell (such as detect evil) as a 
free action. 
 
Cast a Quickened Spell 
You can cast a quickened spell (see the Quicken Spell feat, page 98) 
or any spell whose casting time is designated as a free action (such as 
the feather fall spell) as a free action. Only one such spell can be cast 
in any round, and such spells don’t count toward your normal limit 
of  one  spell  per  round.  Casting  a  spell  with  a  casting  time  of  a  free  
action doesn’t incur an attack of opportunity. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS ACTIONS 
Some  actions  don’t  fit  neatly  into  the  above  categories.  Some  of  
these  options  are  actions  that  take  the  place  of  or  are  variations  on  
the  actions  described  under  Standard  Actions,  Move  Actions,  and  
Full-Round Actions. For actions not covered below, the DM lets you 
know how long such an action takes to perform and whether doing 
so  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity  from  threatening  enemies.  The  
variant   and   special   attacks   mentioned   here   are   covered   under   
Special Attacks, page 154. 
 
Take 5-Foot Step 
You can move 5 feet in any round when you don’t perform any other 
kind of movement. Taking this 5-foot step never provokes an attack 
of opportunity. You can’t take more than one 5-foot step in a round, 
and  you  can’t  take  a  5-foot  step  in  the  same  round  when  you  move  
any distance. 
You  can  take  a  5-foot  step  before,  during,  or  after  your  other  ac-
tions  in  the  round.  For  example,  you  could  draw  a  weapon  (a  move  
action), take a 5-foot step, and then attack (a standard action), or you 
could  cast  fireball  (a  standard  action),  take  a  5-foot  step  through  an  
open door, then close the door (a move action). 
You  can  only  take  a  5-foot-step  if  your  movement  isn’t  hampered  
by  difficult  terrain  (see  page  148)  or  darkness.  Any  creature  with  a  
speed  of  5  feet  or  less  can’t  take  a  5-foot  step,  since  moving  even  5  
feet requires a move action for such a slow creature. 
You  may  not  take  a  5-foot  step  using  a  form  of  movement  for  
which you do not have a listed speed. For example, if you don’t have 
a  Climb  speed  listed,  you  can’t  use  climbing  to  make  a  5-foot  step.  
Similarly,  you  can’t  take  a  5-foot  step  when  swimming  unless  you  
have a listed swim speed. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
145
 
Use Feat 
Certain feats, such as Whirlwind Attack, let you take special actions 
in  combat.  Other  feats  do  not  require  actions  themselves,  but  they  
give  you  a  bonus  when  attempting  something  you  can  already  do,  
such  as  Improved  Disarm.  Some  feats,  such  as  item  creation  feats,    
are  not  meant  to  be  used  within  the  framework  of  combat.  The  
individual  feat  descriptions  in  Chapter  5  tell  you  what  you  need  to  
know about them. 
 
Use Skill 
Most  skill  uses  are  standard  actions,  but  some  might  be  move  
actions,  full-round  actions,  free  actions,  or  something  else  entirely.  
The  individual  skill  descriptions  in  Chapter  4  tell  you  what  sorts  of  
actions are required to perform skills. 
 
INJURY AND DEATH 
Your  hit  points  measure  how  hard  you  are  to  kill.  No  matter  how  
many  hit  points  you  lose,  your  character  isn’t  hindered  in  any  way  
until your hit points drop to 0 or lower. 
 
LOSS OF HIT POINTS 
The most common way that your character gets hurt is to take lethal 
damage   and   lose   hit   points,   whether   from   an   orc’s   falchion,   a   
wizard’s lightning  bolt  spell,  or  a  fall  into  molten  lava.  You  record  
your  character’s  hit  point  total  on  your  character  sheet.  As  your  
character  takes  damage,  you  subtract  that  damage  from  your  hit  
points,  leaving  you  with  your  current  hit  points.  Current  hit  points  
go down when you take damage and go back up when you recover. 
What Hit Points Represent: Hit points mean two things in the 
game world: the ability to take physical punishment and keep going, 
and  the  ability  to  turn  a  serious  blow  into  a  less  serious  one.  For  
some  characters,  hit  points  may  represent  divine  favor  or  inner  
power. When a paladin survives a fireball, you will be hard pressed to 
convince  bystanders  that  she  doesn’t  have  the  favor  of  some  higher  
power. 
Damaging  Helpless  Defenders:  Even  if  you  have  lots  of  hit  
points, a dagger through the eye is a dagger through the eye. When a 
character  is  helpless,  meaning  that  he  can’t  avoid  damage  or  deflect  
blows somehow, he’s in trouble (see Helpless Defenders, page 153). 
Effects of Hit Point Damage: Damage gives you scars, bangs up 
your  armor,  and  gets  blood  on  your  tunic,  but  it  doesn’t  slow  you  
down until your current hit points reach 0 or lower. 
At 0 hit points, you’re disabled. 
At from –1 to –9 hit points, you’re dying. 
At –10 or lower, you’re dead. 
Massive  Damage:  If  you  ever  sustain  damage  so  massive  that  a  
single  attack  deals  50  points  of  damage  or  more  and  it  doesn’t  kill  
you  outright,  you  must  make  a  DC  15  Fortitude  save.  If  this  saving  
throw  fails,  you  die  regardless  of  your  current  hit  points.  This  
amount  of  damage  represents  a  single  trauma  so  major  that  it  has  a  
chance  to  kill  even  the  toughest  creature.  If  you  take  50  points  of  
damage  or  more  from  multiple  attacks,  no  one  of  which  dealt  50  or  
more  points  of  damage  itself,  the  massive  damage  rule  does  not  
apply. 
 
DISABLED (0 HIT POINTS) 
When  your  current  hit  points  drop  to  exactly  0,  you’re  disabled.  
You’re  not  unconscious,  but  you’re  close  to  it.  You  can  only  take  a  
single move or standard action each turn (but not both, nor can you 
take full-round actions). You can take move actions without further 
injuring  yourself,  but  if  you  perform  any  standard  action  (or  any  
other   action   the   DM   deems   as   strenuous,   including   some   free   
actions such as casting a quickened spell) you take 1 point of damage 
after the completing the act. Unless your activity increased your hit 
points, you are now at –1 hit points, and you’re dying. 
Healing  that  raises  your  hit  points  above  0  makes  you  fully  
functional again, just as if you’d never been reduced to 0 or fewer hit 
points.   A   spellcaster   retains   the   spellcasting   capability   she   had   
before dropping to 0 hit points. 
You  can  also  become  disabled  when  recovering  from  dying.  In  
this  case,  it’s  a  step  toward  recovery,  and  you  can  have  fewer  than  0  
hit points (see Stable Characters and Recovery, below). 
 
DYING (–1 TO –9 HIT POINTS) 
When your character’s current hit points drop to between –1 and –9 
inclusive, he’s dying. 
A dying character immediately falls unconscious and can take no 
actions. 
A  dying  character  loses  1  hit  point  every  round.  This  continues  
until the character dies or becomes stable (see below). 
 
DEAD (–10 HIT POINTS OR LOWER) 
When your character’s current hit points drop to –10 or lower, or if 
he takes massive damage (see above), he’s dead. A character can also 
die  from  taking  ability  damage  or  suffering  an  ability  drain  that  
reduces  his  Constitution  to  0.  When  a  character  dies,  his  soul  
immediately  departs.  Getting  it  back  into  the  body  is  a  major  hassle  
(see Bringing Back the Dead, page 171). 
 
STABLE CHARACTERS AND RECOVERY 
On  the  next  turn  after  a  character  is  reduced  to  between  –1  and  –9  
hit  points  and  on  all  subsequent  turns,  roll  d%  to  see  whether  the  
dying  character  becomes  stable.  He  has  a  10%  chance  of  becoming  
stable.  If  he  doesn’t,  he  loses  1  hit  point.  (A  character  who’s  uncon-
scious  or  dying  can’t  use  any  special  action  that  changes  the  initia-
tive count on which his action occurs.) 
If the character’s hit points drop to –10 or lower, he’s dead. 
You  can  keep  a  dying  character  from  losing  any  more  hit  points  
and make him stable with a DC 15 Heal check. 
If any sort of healing cures the dying character of even 1 point of 
damage, he stops losing hit points and becomes stable. 
Healing  that  raises  the  dying  character’s  hit  points  to  0  makes  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
146 
him conscious and disabled. Healing that raises his hit points to 1 or 
more  makes  him  fully  functional  again,  just  as  if  he’d  never  been  
reduced  to  0  or  lower.  A  spellcaster  retains  the  spellcasting  capa-
bility she had before dropping below 0 hit points. 
A  stable  character  who  has  been  tended  by  a  healer  or  who  has  
been   magically   healed   eventually   regains   consciousness   and   re-
covers  hit  points  naturally.  If  the  character  has  no  one  to  tend  him,  
however, his life is still in danger, and he may yet slip away. 
Recovering with Help: One hour after a tended, dying character 
becomes  stable,  roll  d%.  He  has  a  10%  chance  of  becoming  con-
scious, at which point he is disabled (as if he had 0 hit points). If he 
remains unconscious, he has the same chance to revive and become 
disabled  every  hour.  Even  if  unconscious,  he  recovers  hit  points  
naturally.  He  is  back  to  normal  when  his  hit  points  rise  to  1  or  
higher. 
Recovering  without  Help:  A  severely  wounded  character  left  
alone usually dies. He has a small chance, however, of recovering on 
his  own.  Even  if  he  seems  as  though  he’s  pulling  through,  he  can  
still  finally  succumb  to  his  wounds  hours  or  days  after  originally  
taking damage. 
A  character  who  becomes  stable  on  his  own  (by  making  the  10%  
roll  while  dying)  and  who  has  no  one  to  tend  to  him  still  loses  hit  
points,  just  at  a  slower  rate.  He  has  a  10%  chance  each  hour  of  
becoming conscious. Each time he misses his hourly roll to become 
conscious,  he  loses  1  hit  point.  He  also  does  not  recover  hit  points  
through natural healing. 
Even  once  he  becomes  conscious  and  is  disabled,  an  unaided  
character  still  does  not  recover  hit  points  naturally.  Instead,  each  
day  he  has  a  10%  chance  to  start  recovering  hit  points  naturally  
(starting with that day); otherwise, he loses 1 hit point. 
Once  an  unaided  character  starts  recovering  hit  points  naturally,  
he  is  no  longer  in  danger  of  naturally  losing  hit  points  (even  if  his  
current hit point total is negative). 
 
HEALING 
After  taking  damage,  you  can  recover  hit  points  through  natural  
healing or through magical healing. In any case, you can’t regain hit 
points past your full normal hit point total. 
Natural  Healing:  With  a  full  night’s  rest  (8  hours  of  sleep  or  
more),  you  recover  1  hit  point  per  character  level.  For  example,  a  
5th-level  fighter  recovers  5  hit  points  with  a  night  of  rest.  Any  sig-
nificant  interruption  (such  as  combat  or  the  like)  during  your  rest  
prevents you from healing that night. 
If you undergo complete bed rest for an entire day and night, you 
recover  twice  your  character  level  in  hit  points.  A  5th-level  fighter  
recovers 10 hit points per 24 hours of bed rest. 
Magical  Healing:  Various  abilities  and  spells,  such  as  a  cleric’s  
cure spells or a paladin’s lay on hands ability,  can restore hit points. 
Healing Limits: You can never recover more hit points than you 
lost. Magical healing won’t raise your current hit points higher than 
your full normal hit point total. 
Healing  Ability  Damage:  Ability  damage  is  temporary,  just  as  
hit point damage is. Ability damage returns at the rate of 1 point per 
night  of  rest  (8  hours)  for  each  affected  ability  score.  Complete  bed  
rest  restores  2  points  per  day  (24  hours)  for  each  affected  ability  
score. 
 
TEMPORARY HIT POINTS 
Certain  effects,  such  as  the  aid  spell,  give  a  character  temporary  hit  
points.  When  a  character  gains  temporary  hit  points,  note  his  cur-
rent hit point total. When the temporary hit points go away, such as 
at  the  end  of  the  aid  spell’s  duration,  the  character’s  hit  points  drop  
to  his  current  hit  point  total.  If  the  character’s  hit  points  are  below  
his  current  hit  point  total  at  that  time,  all  the  temporary  hit  points  
have  already  been  lost  and  the  character’s  hit  point  total  does  not  
drop further. 
When  temporary  hit  points  are  lost,  they  cannot  be  restored  as  
real hit points can be, even by magic. 
Increases in Constitution Score and Current Hit Points: An 
increase  in  a  character’s  Constitution  score,  even  a  temporary  one,  
can  give  her  more  hit  points  (an  effective  hit  point  increase),  but  
these  are  not  temporary  hit  points.  They  can  be  restored,  such  as  
with cure  light  wounds,  and  they  are  not  lost  first  as  temporary  hit  
points  are.  For  example,  Krusk  (now  a  3rd-level  barbarian)  gains  +4  
to his Constitution score and +6 hit points when he rages, raising his 
hit points from 31 to 37. If Krusk takes damage dropping him to 32 
hit points, Jozan can cure those lost points and get him back to 37. If 
Krusk  is  so  wounded  at  the  end  of  his  rage  that  he  only  has  5  hit  
points left, then when he loses his 6 extra hit points, he drops to –1 
hit points and is dying. 
 
NONLETHAL DAMAGE 
Sometimes  you  get  roughed  up  or  weakened,  such  as  by  getting  
clocked  in  a  fistfight  or  tired  out  by  a  forced  march.  This  sort  of  
trauma won’t kill you, but it can knock you out or make you faint. 
If you take sufficient nonlethal damage, you fall unconscious, but 
you  don’t  die.  Nonlethal  damage  goes  away  much  faster  than  lethal  
damage does. 
Dealing   Nonlethal   Damage:   Certain   attacks   deal   nonlethal   
damage, such as a normal human’s unarmed strike (a punch, kick, or 
head  butt).  Other  effects,  such  as  heat  or  being  exhausted,  also  deal  
nonlethal   damage.   When   you   take   nonlethal   damage,   keep   a   
running  total  of  how  much  you’ve  accumulated.  Do  not  deduct  the  
nonlethal  damage  number  from  your  current  hit  points.  It  is  not  “real”  
damage.  Instead,  when  your  nonlethal  damage  equals  your  current  
hit  points,  you’re  staggered,  and  when  it  exceeds  your  current  hit  
points, you fall unconscious. It doesn’t matter whether the nonlethal 
damage   equals   or   exceeds   your   current   hit   points   because   the   
nonlethal  damage  has  gone  up  or  because  your  current  hit  points  
have gone down. 
Nonlethal Damage with a Weapon that Deals Lethal Damage: You can 
use  a  melee  weapon  that  deals  lethal  damage  to  deal  nonlethal  
damage  instead,  but  you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  your  attack  roll  
because you have to use the flat of the blade, strike at nonvital areas, 
or check your swing. 
Lethal Damage with a Weapon that Deals Nonlethal Damage: You can 
use  a  weapon  that  deals  nonlethal  damage,  including  an  unarmed  
strike,  to  deal  lethal  damage  instead,  but  you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  
your   attack   roll   because   you   have   to   strike   only   in   the   most   
vulnerable areas to inflict lethal damage. 
Staggered   and   Unconscious:   When   your   nonlethal   damage   
equals  your  current  hit  points,  you’re  staggered.  You’re  so  roughed  
up that you can only take a standard action or a move action in each 
round. You cease being staggered when your current hit points once 
again exceed your nonlethal damage. 
When  your  nonlethal  damage  exceeds  your  current  hit  points,  
you  fall  unconscious.  While  unconscious,  you  are  helpless  (see  
Helpless Defenders, page 153). 
Spellcasters  who  fall  unconscious  retain  any  spellcasting  ability  
they had before going unconscious. 
Healing  Nonlethal  Damage:  You  heal  nonlethal  damage  at  the  
rate  of  1  hit  point  per  hour  per  character  level.  For  example,  a  7th-
level  wizard  heals  7  points  of  nonlethal  damage  each  hour  until  all  
the nonlethal damage is gone. 
When  a  spell  or  a  magical  power  cures  hit  point  damage,  it  also  
removes an equal amount of nonlethal damage. 
 
MOVEMENT, POSITION, 
AND DISTANCE 
Few  characters  in  a  fight  stand  around  motionless.  Enemies  appear  
and  charge  the  party.  The  heroes  reply,  advancing  to  take  on  new  
foes  after  they  down  their  first  opponents.  Wizards  remain  outside  
the  fight,  looking  for  the  best  place  to  use  their  magic.  Rogues  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
147
quietly skirt the fracas seeking a straggler or an unwary opponent to 
strike with a sneak attack. Finally, if the fight is lost, most characters 
seek   to   remove   themselves   from   the   vicinity.   Movement   is   an   
important element for gaining the upper hand on the battlefield. 
Dungeons  &  Dragons  miniatures  are  on  the  30mm  scale—a  
miniature figure of a six-foot-tall human is approximately 30mm tall. 
A square on the battle grid is 1 inch across, representing a 5-foot-by-
5-foot area. 
 
TACTICAL MOVEMENT 
Where  you  can  move,  how  long  it  takes  you  to  get  there,  and  
whether  you’re  vulnerable  to  attacks  of  opportunity  while  you’re  
moving are key questions in combat. 
 
How Far Can Your Character Move? 
Your speed is determined by your race and your armor (see Table 8–
3:  Tactical  Speed).  Your  speed  while  unarmored  is  your  base  land  
speed. 
Encumbrance:   A   character   encumbered   by   carrying   a   large   
amount  of  gear,  treasure,  or  fallen  comrades  may  move  slower  than  
normal (see Carrying Capacity, page 161). 
Hampered  Movement:  Difficult  terrain,  obstacles,  or  poor  vis-
ibility can hamper movement (see Terrain and Obstacles, below, and 
Hampered Movement, page 163). 
Movement in Combat: Generally, you can move your speed in a 
round and still do something, such as swing an axe or cast a spell. If 
you do nothing but move (that is, if you use both of your actions in a 
round to move your speed), you can move double your speed. If you 
spend  the  entire  round  running,  you  can  move  quadruple  your  
speed.  If  you  do  something  that  requires  a  full  round  you  can  only  
take a 5-foot step. 
Bonuses to Speed: A barbarian has a +10 foot bonus to his speed 
(unless  he’s  wearing  heavy  armor).  Experienced  monks  also  have  
higher speed (unless they’re wearing armor of any sort). In addition, 
many  spells  and  magic  items  can  affect  a  character’s  speed.  Always  
apply  any  modifiers  to  a  character’s  speed  before  adjusting  the  
character’s  speed  based  on  armor  or  encumbrance,  and  remember  
that multiple bonuses of the same type to a character’s speed (such as 
enhancement bonuses) don’t stack. 
 
Table 8–3: Tactical Speed 
 No Armor or Medium or 
Race Light Armor Heavy Armor 
Human, elf, half-elf, half-orc 30 ft.(6 squares) 20 ft.(4 squares) 
Dwarf 20 ft.(4 squares) 20 ft.(4 squares) 
Halfling, gnome 20 ft.(4 squares) 15 ft.(3 squares) 
 
Measuring Distance 
Diagonals:  When  measuring  distance,  the  first  diagonal  counts  
as 1 square, the second counts as 2 squares, the third counts as 1, the 
fourth  as  2,  and  so  on.  (If  it  helps,  you  can  think  of  a  diagonal  as  a  
distance of 1.5 squares.) 
You  can’t  move  diagonally  past  a  corner  (even  by  taking  a  5-foot  
step).  You  can  move  diagonally  past  a  creature,  even  an  opponent.  
You  can  also  move  diagonally  past  other  impassable  obstacles,  such  
as pits. 
Closest  Creature:  When  it’s  important  to  determine  the  closest  
square  or  creature  to  a  location,  if  two  squares  or  creatures  are  
equally  close,  randomly  determine  which  one  counts  as  closest  by  
rolling a die. 
 
Moving through a Square 
Friend:  You  can  move  through  a  square  occupied  by  a  friendly  
character,  unless  you  are  charging  (page  154).  When  you  move  
through  a  square  occupied  by  a  friendly  character,  that  character  
doesn’t provide you with cover (see page 150). 
Opponent:  You  can’t  move  through  a  square  occupied  by  an  op-
ponent,   unless   the   opponent   is   helpless   (dead,   unconscious,   
paralyzed,  bound,  or  the  like).  You  can  move  through  a  square  
occupied  by  a  helpless  opponent  without  penalty.  (The  DM  may  
rule  that  some  creatures,  such  as  an  enormous  dragon,  present  an  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
148 
obstacle  even  when  helpless.  In  such  cases,  each  square  you  move  
through counts as 2 squares.) 
Ending  Your  Movement:  You  can’t  end  your  movement  in  the  
same square as another creature unless it is helpless. 
Overrun:  During  your  movement  or  as  part  of  a  charge,  you  can  
attempt  to  move  through  a  square  occupied  by  an  opponent  (see  
Overrun, page 157). 
Tumbling:  A  trained  character  can  attempt  to  tumble  through  a  
square occupied by an opponent (see the Tumble skill, page 84). 
Very  Small  Creature:  A  Fine,  Diminutive,  or  Tiny  creature  can  
move  into  or  through  an  occupied  square.  The  creature  provokes  
attacks of opportunity when doing so. 
Square Occupied by Creature Three Sizes Larger or Smaller: 
Any  creature  can  move  through  a  square  occupied  by  a  creature  
three size categories larger than it is. A gnome (Small), for example, 
can run between the legs of a cloud giant (Huge). 
A big creature can move through a square occupied by a creature 
three  size  categories  smaller  than  it  is.  A  cloud  giant,  for  example,  
can step over a gnome. 
Designated  Exceptions:  Some  creatures  break  the  above  rules.  
For  example,  a  gelatinous  cube  fills  the  squares  it  occupies  to  a  
height  of  15  feet.  A  creature  that  completely  fills  the  squares  it  
occupies  cannot  be  moved  past,  even  with  the  Tumble  skill  or  
similar special abilities. 
 
Terrain and Obstacles 
The rules presented so far in this section assume that you’re moving 
through  an  area  clear  of  obstacles  or  difficult  terrain.  However,  in  
dungeons and wilderness areas, that’s often not the case. 
Difficult  Terrain: Difficult terrain, such as rubble, an uneven 
cave  floor,  thick  undergrowth,  and  the  like,  hampers  movement.  
Each  square  of  difficult  terrain  counts  as  2  squares  of  movement.  
(Each  diagonal  move  into  a  difficult  terrain  square  counts  as  3  
squares.) You can’t run or charge across difficult terrain. 
If  you  occupy  squares  with  different  kinds  of  terrain,  you  can  
move only as fast as the most difficult terrain you occupy will allow. 
(This  is  often  significant  for  creatures  whose  space  fills  more  than  
one square, such as a giant.) 
Flying  and  incorporeal  creatures  are  not  hampered  by  difficult  
terrain. 
Obstacles:  Like  difficult  terrain,  obstacles  can  hamper  move-
ment.  If  an  obstacle  hampers  movement  but  doesn’t  completely  
block it, such as a low wall or a deadfall of branches,  each obstructed 
square  or  obstacle  between  squares  counts  as  2  squares  of  move-
ment.  You  must  pay  this  cost  to  cross  the  barrier,  in  addition  to  the  
cost  to  move  into  the  square  on  the  other  side.  If  you  don’t  have  
sufficient  movement  to  cross  the  barrier  and  move  into  the  square  
on  the  other  side,  you  can’t  cross  the  barrier.  Some  obstacles  may  
also require a skill check to cross (such as Climb of Jump). 
On  the  other  hand,  some  obstacles,  such  as  floor-to-ceiling  walls,  
block   movement   entirely.   A   character   can’t   move   through   a   
blocking obstacle. 
Flying and incorporeal creatures can avoid most obstacles though 
a floor-to-ceiling wall blocks a flying creature as well as a landbound 
creature. 
Squeezing:  In  some  cases,  you  may  have  to  squeeze  into  or  
through  an  area  that  isn’t  as  wide  as  the  space  you  take  up.  (This  is  
particularly  true  for  creatures  whose  space  fills  more  than  one  
square, such as a giant.) You can squeeze through or into a space that 
is  at  least  half  as  wide  as  your  normal  space.  For  instance,  an  ogre  
(whose  space  is  10  feet,  or  2  squares,  wide)  can  squeeze  through  or  
into  a  space  at  least  5  feet  (1  square)  wide.  Each  move  into  or  
through  a  narrow  space  counts  as  if  it  were  2  squares,  and  while  
squeezed in a narrow space you take a –4 penalty on attack rolls and 
a –4 penalty to AC. 
When  a  Large  creature  (which  normally  takes  up  four  squares)  
squeezes into a space that’s one square wide, the creature’s miniature 
figure  occupies  two  squares,  centered  on  the  line  between  the  two  
squares.  For  a  bigger  creature,  center  the  creature  likewise  in  the  
area it squeezes into. 
A creature can squeeze past an opponent while moving but it can’t 
end its movement in an occupied square. 
To  squeeze  through  or  into  a  space  less  than  half  your  space’s  
width,  you  must  use  the  Escape  Artist  skill  (page  73).  You  can’t  
attack while using Escape Artist to squeeze through or into a narrow 
space, you take a –4 penalty to AC, and you lose any Dexterity bonus 
to AC. 
 
Special Movement Rules 
These rules cover special movement situations. 
Accidentally  Ending  Movement  in  an  Illegal  Space:  Some-
times a character ends its movement while moving through a space 
where  it’s  not  allowed  to  stop.  For  example,  you  might  incur  an  
attack of opportunity from a monk while moving through a friend’s 
square   and   become   stunned.   When   that   happens,   put   your   
miniature in the last legal position you occupied, or the closest legal 
position, if there’s a legal position that’s closer. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
149
Double Movement Cost: When your movement is hampered in 
some  way,  your  movement  usually  costs  double.  For  example,  each  
square  of  movement  through  difficult  terrain  counts  as  2  squares,  
and  each  diagonal  move  through  such  terrain  counts  as  3  squares  
(just as two diagonal moves normally do). 
If  movement  cost  is  doubled  twice,  then  each  square  counts  as  4  
squares  (or  as  6  squares  if  moving  diagonally).  If  movement  cost  is  
doubled  three  times,  then  each  square  counts  as  8  squares  (12  if  
diagonal) and so on. This is an exception to the general rule that two 
doublings are equivalent to a tripling. 
Minimum  Movement: Despite penalties to movement, you can 
take  a  full-round  action  to  move  5  feet  (1  square)  in  any  direction,  
even  diagonally.  (This  rule  doesn’t  allow  you  to  move  through  im-
passable  terrain  or  to  move  when  all  movement  is  prohibited,  such  
as  while  paralyzed.)  Such  movement  provokes  attacks  of  opportu-
nity as normal (despite the distance covered, this move isn’t a 5-foot 
step). 
 
BIG AND LITTLE CREATURES IN COMBAT 
Creatures  smaller  than  Small  or  larger  than  Medium  have  special  
rules   relating   to   position.   This   section   covers   the   basics;   the   
Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  has  more  information  on  how  to  handle  
exceptionally  big  or  small  creatures.  The  illustration  on  the  fol-
lowing page depicts creatures of various size categories. 
Tiny,  Diminutive,  and  Fine  Creatures:  Very  small  creatures  
take  up  less  than  1  square  of  space.  This  means  that  more  than  one  
such  creature  can  fit  into  a  single  square.  For  example,  a  Tiny  crea-
ture  (such  as  a  cat)  typically  occupies  a  space  only  2-1/2  feet  across,  
so four can fit into a single square. Twenty-five Diminutive creatures 
or 100 Fine creatures can fit into a single square. 
Creatures that take up less than 1 square of space typically have a 
natural  reach  of  0  feet,  meaning  they  can’t  reach  into  adjacent  
squares.  They  must  enter  an  opponent’s  square  to  attack  in  melee.  
This provokes an attack of opportunity from the opponent. You can 
attack  into  your  own  square  if  you  need  to,  so  you  can  attack  such  
creatures  normally.  Since  they  have  no  natural  reach,  they  do  not  
threaten the squares around them. You can move past them without 
provoking attacks of opportunity. They also can’t flank an enemy. 
Large,  Huge,  Gargantuan,  and  Colossal  Creatures:  Very  large  
creatures  take  up  more  than  1  square.  For  instance,  an  ogre  (Large)  
takes up a space 10 feet on a side (2 squares wide). 
Creatures that take up more than 1 square typically have a natural 
reach of 10 feet or more, meaning that they can reach targets even if 
they  aren’t  in  adjacent  squares.  For  instance,  an  ogre  can  attack  
targets  up  to  10  feet  (2  squares)  away  from  it  in  any  direction,  even  
diagonally.   (This   is   an   exception   to   the   rule   that   2   squares   of   
diagonal distance is measured as 15 feet.) 
Unlike  when  someone  uses  a  reach  weapon,  a  creature  with  
greater  than  normal  natural  reach  (more  than  5  feet)  still  threatens  
 
Table 8–4: Creature Size and Scale 
Creature                      Example                      
Size                             Creature                             Space
1
    Natural    Reach
1
 
Fine                             Fly                               1/2                             ft.                             0                             
Diminutive                 Toad                 1                 ft.                  0                 
Tiny                             Cat                             2-1/2                             ft.                             0                             
Small Halfling 5 ft. 5 ft. 
Medium Human 5 ft. 5 ft. 
Large (tall) Ogre 10 ft. 10 ft. 
Large (long) Horse 10 ft. 5 ft. 
Huge (tall) Cloud giant 15 ft. 15 ft. 
Huge (long) Bulette 15 ft. 10 ft. 
Gargantuan (tall) 50-ft. animated 20 ft. 20 ft. 
                                    statue                                    
Gargantuan (long)     Kraken 20 ft. 15 ft. 
Colossal (tall) Colossal animated 30 ft. 30 ft. 
                                    object                                    or                                    more                                    or                                    more                                    
Colossal (long) Great wyrm 30 ft. 20 ft. 
 red dragon or more or more 
1 These values are typical for creatures of the indicated size. Some 
exceptions exist. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
150 
sq 
squares adjacent to it. A creature with greater than normal 
natural  reach  usually  gets  an  attack  of  opportunity  against  
you if you approach it, because you must enter and move within the 
range  of  its  reach  before  you  can  attack  it.  (This  attack  of  oppor-
tunity is not provoked if you take a 5-foot step.) 
Large  or  larger  creatures  using  reach  weapons  can  strike  up  to  
double their natural reach but can’t strike at their natural reach or 
less.  For  example,  an  ogre  with  a  Large  longspear  could  strike  
with  the  longspear  at  opponents  15  or  20  feet  away,  but  not  at  
those 5 or 10 feet away. 
 
COMBAT MODIFIERS 
Sometimes  you  just  have  to  go  toe-to-toe  in  a  fight,  but  you  can  
usually  gain  some  advantage  by  seeking  a  better  position,  either  
offensively  or  defensively.  This  section  covers  the  rules  for  when  
you  can  line  up  a  particularly  good  attack  or  are  forced  to  make  a  
disadvantageous one. 
 
FAVORABLE AND 
UNFAVORABLE CONDITIONS 
Depending on the situation, you may gain bonuses or take penalties 
on  your  attack  roll.  Generally,  any  situational  modifier  created  by  
the  attacker’s  position  or  tactics  applies  to  the  attack  roll,  while  any  
situational  modifier  created  by  the  defender’s  position,  state,  or  
tactics  applies  to  the  defender’s  AC.  Your  DM  judges  what  bonuses  
and  penalties  apply,  using  Table  8–5:  Attack  Roll  Modifiers  and  
Table 8–6: Armor Class Modifiers as guides. 
 
COVER 
One  of  the  best  defenses  available  is  cover.  By  
taking  cover  behind  a  tree,  a  wall,  the  side  of  a  
wagon,  or  the  battlements  of  a  castle,  you  can  
protect  yourself  from  attacks,  especially  ranged  
attacks, and also from being spotted. 
To  determine  whether  your  target  has  
cover  from  your  ranged  attack,  choose  a  
corner  of  your  square.  If  any  line  from  
this  corner  to  any  corner  of  the  target’s  
square passes through a square or border 
that   blocks   line   of   effect   or   provides   
cover, or through a square occupied by a 
creature,  the  target  has  cover  (+4  to  
AC). 
 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
151
Table 8–5: Attack Roll Modifiers 
Attacker is . . . Melee Ranged 
Dazzled                                                                  –1                                                                  –1                                                                  
Entangled                                                              –2
1
                      –2
1
 
Flanking defender +2 — 
Invisible                                                                 +2
2
                      +2
2
 
On higher ground +1 +0 
Prone                                                                     –4                                                                     —
3
 
Shaken or frightened –2 –2 
Squeezing through a space –4 –4 
1 An entangled character also takes a –4 penalty to Dexterity, which may 
affect his attack roll. 
2 The defender loses any Dexterity bonus to AC. This bonus doesn’t 
apply if the target is blinded. 
3 Most ranged weapons can’t be used while the attacker is prone, but 
you can use a crossbow or shuriken while prone at no penalty.
 
 
When  making  a  melee  attack  against  an  adjacent  target,  your  
target  has  cover  if  any  line  from  your  square  to  the  target’s  square  
goes  through  a  wall  (including  a  low  wall).  When  making  a  melee  
attack against a target that isn’t adjacent to you (such as with a reach 
weapon), use the rules for determining cover from ranged attacks. 
Low  Obstacles  and  Cover:  A  low  obstacle  (such  as  a  wall  no  
higher  than  half  your  height)  provides  cover,  but  only  to  creatures  
within  30  feet  (6  squares)  of  it.  The  attacker  can  ignore  the  cover  if  
he’s closer to the obstacle than his target. 
Cover and Attacks of Opportunity: You can’t execute an attack 
of opportunity against an opponent with cover relative to you. 
Cover and Reflex Saves: Cover grants you a +2 bonus on Reflex 
saves  against  attacks  that  originate  or  burst  out  from  a  point  on  the  
other  side  of  the  cover  from  you,  such  as  a  red  dragon’s  breath  
weapon  or  a  lightning  bolt.  Note  that  spread  effects  (see  page  175),  
such  as  a  fireball,  can  extend  around  corners  and  thus  negate  this  
cover bonus. 
Cover  and  Hide  Checks:  You  can  use  cover  to  make  a  Hide  
check. Without cover, you usually need concealment (see below) to 
make a Hide check. 
Table 8–6: Armor Class Modifiers 
Defender is . . . Melee Ranged 
Behind cover +4 +4 
Blinded                                                                  –2
1
                      –2
1
 
Concealed or invisible — See Concealment — 
Cowering                                                               –2
1
                      –2
1
 
Entangled                                                              +0
2
                      +0
2
 
Flat-footed                                                            +0
1
                      +0
1
 
(such as surprised, balancing, climbing) 
Grappling (but attacker is not) +0
1
                    +0
1, 3
 
Helpless                                                                –4
4
                      +0
4 
(such as paralyzed, sleeping, or bound) 
Kneeling or sitting –2 +2 
Pinned                                                                   –4
4
                      +0
4
 
Prone                                                                     –4                                                                     +4                                                                     
Squeezing through a space –4 –4 
Stunned                                                                 –2
1
                      –2
1
 
1 The defender loses any Dexterity bonus to AC. 
2 An entangled character takes a –4 penalty to Dexterity. 
3 Roll randomly to see which grappling combatant you strike. That 
defender loses any Dexterity bonus to AC. 
4 Treat the defender’s Dexterity as 0 (–5 modifier). Rogues can sneak 
attack helpless or pinned defenders. See also Helpless Defenders, 
page 153.
 
 
Soft  Cover:  Creatures,  even  your  enemies,  can  provide  you  with  
cover  against  
ranged att  acks,  giving you  a  +4  bonus  to  AC.  However,  
such  soft  cover  provides  no  bonus  on  Reflex  saves,  nor  does  soft  
cover allow you to make a Hide check. 
Big Creatures and Cover: Any creature with a space larger than 
5  feet  (1  square)  determines  cover  against  melee  attacks  slightly  
differently than smaller creatures do. Such a creature can choose any 
square that it occupies to determine if an opponent has cover against 
its  melee  attacks.  Similarly,  when  making  a  melee  attack  against  
such  a  creature,  you  can  pick  any  of  the  squares  it  occupies  to  
determine if it has cover against you. 
 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
152 
Total  Cover:  If  you  don’t  have  line  of  effect  to  your  target  (for  
instance, if he is completely behind a high wall), he is considered to 
have  total  cover  from  you.  You  can’t  make  an  attack  against  a  target  
that has total cover. 
Varying  Degrees  of  Cover:  In  some  cases,  cover  may  provide  a  
greater  bonus  to  AC  and  Reflex  saves.  For  instance,  a  character  
peering  around  a  corner  or  through  an  arrow  slit  has  even  better  
cover than a character standing behind a low wall or an obstacle. In 
such situations, the DM can double the normal cover bonuses to AC 
and  Reflex  saves  (to  +8  and  +4,  respectively).  A  creature  with  this  
improved   cover   effectively   gains   improved   evasion   against   any   
attack  to  which  the  Reflex  save  bonus  applies  (see  the  improved  
evasion ability in the rogue class description, page 51). Furthermore, 
improved cover provides a +10 bonus on Hide checks. 
The  DM  may  impose  other  penalties  or  restrictions  to  attacks  
depending  on  the  details  of  the  cover.  For  example,  to  strike  effec-
tively  through  a  narrow  opening,  you  need  to  use  a  long  piercing  
weapon,  such  as  an  arrow  or  a  spear.  A  battleaxe  or  a  pick  just  isn’t  
going to get through an arrow slit. 
 
CONCEALMENT 
Besides  cover,  another  way  to  avoid  attacks  is  to  make  it  hard  for  
opponents  to  know  where  you  are.  Concealment  encompasses  all  
circumstances  where  nothing  physically  blocks  a  blow  or  shot  but  
where     something     interferes     with     an     attacker’s     accuracy.     
Concealment  gives  the  subject  of  a  successful  attack  a  chance  that  
the attacker missed because of the concealment. 
Typically, concealment is provided by fog, smoke, a shadowy area, 
darkness, tall grass, foliage, or magical effects that make it difficult to 
pinpoint a target’s location. 
To  determine  whether  your  target  has  concealment  from  your  
ranged  attack,  choose  a  corner  of  your  square.  If  any  line  from  this  
corner to any corner of the target’s square passes through a square or 
border that provides concealment, the target has concealment. 
When  making  a  melee  attack  against  an  adjacent  target,  your  
target  has  concealment  if  his  space  is  entirely  within  an  effect  that  
grants  concealment  (such  as  a  cloud  of  smoke).  When  making  a  
melee  attack  against  a  target  that  isn’t  adjacent  to  you  (for  instance,  
with  a  reach  weapon),  use  the  rules  for  determining  concealment  
from ranged attacks. 
In  addition,  some  magical  effects  (such  as  the  blur  and  displace-
ment  spells)  provide  concealment  against  all  attacks,  regardless  of  
whether any intervening concealment exists. 
Concealment Miss Chance: Concealment gives the subject of a 
successful  attack  a  20%  chance  that  the  attacker  missed  because  of  
the concealment. If the attacker hits, the defender must make a miss 
chance percentile roll to avoid being struck. (To expedite play, make 
both rolls at the same time). Multiple concealment conditions (such 
as  a  defender  in  a  dog  and  under  the  effect  of  a  blur  spell)  do  not  
stack. 
Concealment  and  Hide  Checks:  You  can  use  concealment  to  
make  a  Hide  check.  Without  concealment,  you  usually  need  cover  
to make a Hide check. 
Total Concealment: If you have line of effect to a target but not 
line of sight (for instance, if he is in total darkness or invisible, or if 
you’re  blinded),  he  is  considered  to  have  total  concealment  from  
you.   You   can’t   attack   an   opponent   that   has   total   concealment,   
though  you  can  attack  into  a  square  that  you  think  he  occupies.  A  
successful  attack  into  a  square  occupied  by  an  enemy  with  total  
concealment has a 50% miss chance (instead of the normal 20% miss 
chance for an opponent with concealment). 
You  can’t  execute  an  attack  of  opportunity  against  an  opponent  
with total concealment, even if you know what square or squares the 
opponent occupies. 
Ignoring  Concealment: Concealment isn’t always effective. For 
instance,  a  shadowy  area  or  darkness  doesn’t  provide  any  conceal-
ment  against  an  opponent  with  darkvision.  Remember  also  that  
characters with low-light vision can see clearly for a greater distance 
with   the   same   light   source   than   other   characters.   A   torch,   for   
example,  lets  an  elf  see  clearly  for  40  feet  in  all  directions  from  the  
torch,  while  a  human  can  see  clearly  for  only  20  feet  with  the  same  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
153
light.  (Fog,  smoke,  foliage,  and  other  visual  obstructions  work  nor-
mally against characters with darkvision or low-light vision.) 
Although  invisibility  provides  total  concealment,  sighted  oppo-
nents  may  still  make  Spot  checks  to  notice  the  location  of  an  invis-
ible  character.  An  invisible  character  gains  a  +20  bonus  on  Hide  
checks if moving, or a +40 bonus on Hide checks when not moving 
(even  though  opponents  can’t  see  you,  they  might  be  able  to  figure  
out where you are from other visual clues). 
Varying  Degrees  of  Concealment:  As  with  cover,  it’s  usually  
not  worth  differentiating  between  more  degrees  of  concealment  
than  described  above.  However,  the  DM  may  rule  that  certain  situ-
ations  provide  more  or  less  than  typical  concealment,  and  modify  
the  miss  chance  accordingly.  For  instance,  a  light  fog  might  only  
provide a 10% miss chance, while near-total darkness could provide a 
40% miss chance (and a +10 circumstance bonus on Hide checks). 
 
FLANKING 
When  making  a  melee  attack,  you  get  a  +2  flanking  bonus  if  your  
opponent is threatened by a character or creature friendly to you on 
the opponent’s opposite border or opposite corner. 
When  in  doubt  about  whether  two  friendly  characters  flank  an  
opponent  in  the  middle,  trace  an  imaginary  line  between  the  two  
friendly  characters’  centers.  If  the  line  passes  through  opposite  
borders  of  the  opponent’s  space  (including  corners  of  those  bor-
ders), then the opponent is flanked. 
Exception:  If  a  flanker  takes  up  more  than  1  square,  it  gets  the  
flanking bonus if any square it occupies counts for flanking. 
Only a creature or character that threatens the defender can help 
an attacker get a flanking bonus. 
Creatures with a reach of 0 feet can’t flank an opponent. 
 
HELPLESS DEFENDERS 
A  helpless  opponent  is  someone  who  is  bound,  sleeping,  paralyzed,  
unconscious, or otherwise at your mercy. 
Regular  Attack:  A  helpless  character  takes  a  –4  penalty  to  AC  
against melee attacks, but no penalty to AC against ranged attacks. A 
helpless  defender  can’t  use  any  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC.  In  fact,  his  
Dexterity score is treated as if it were 0 and his Dexterity modifier to 
AC as if it were –5 (and a rogue can sneak attack him). 
Coup  de  Grace:  As  a  full-round  action,  you  can  use  a  melee  
weapon  to  deliver  a  coup  de  grace  to  a  helpless  opponent.  You  can  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
154 
also  use  a  bow  or  crossbow,  provided  you  are  adjacent  to  the  target.  
You  automatically  hit  and  score  a  critical  hit.  If  the  defender  sur-
vives  the  damage,  he  must  make  a  Fortitude  save  (DC  10  +  damage  
dealt) or die. A rogue also gets her extra sneak attack damage against 
a helpless opponent when delivering a coup de grace. 
Delivering  a  coup  de  grace  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity  from  
threatening  opponents  because  it  involves  focused  concentration  
and methodical action on the part of the attacker. 
You  can’t  deliver  a  coup  de  grace  against  a  creature  that  is  im-
mune  to  critical  hits,  such  as  a  golem.  You  can  deliver  a  coup  de  
grace  against  a  creature  with  total  concealment,  but  doing  this  
requires  two  consecutive  full-round  actions  (one  to  “find”  the  crea-
ture  once  you’ve  determined  what  square  it’s  in,  and  one  to  deliver  
the coup de grace). 
 
SPECIAL ATTACKS 
This  section  covers  grappling,  throwing  splash  weapons  (such  as  
acid  or  holy  water),  attacking  objects  (such  as  trying  to  hack  apart  a  
locked chest), turning or rebuking undead (for clerics and paladins), 
and an assortment of other special attacks. 
 
Table 8–7: Special Attacks 
Special Attack  Brief Description 
Aid another  Grant an ally a +2 bonus on attacks or AC 
Bull rush  Push an opponent back 5 feet or more 
Charge  Move up to twice your speed and attack with 
                                          +2                                          bonus                                          
Disarm  Knock a weapon from your opponent’s 
                                          hands                                          
Feint  Negate your opponent’s Dex bonus to AC 
Grapple  Wrestle with an opponent 
Overrun  Plow past or over an opponent as you move 
Sunder  Strike an opponent’s weapon or shield 
Throw splash weapon  Throw container of dangerous liquid at target 
Trip  Trip an opponent 
Turn (rebuke) undead      Channel positive (or negative) energy to turn 
 away (or awe) undead 
Two-weapon fighting  Fight with a weapon in each hand
 
 
AID ANOTHER 
In melee combat, you can help a friend attack or defend by distract-
ing  or  interfering  with  an  opponent.  If  you’re  in  position  to  make  a  
melee  attack  on  an  opponent  that  is  engaging  a  friend  in  melee  
combat, you can attempt to aid your friend as a standard action. You 
make an attack roll against AC 10. If you succeed, your friend gains 
either  a  +2  bonus  on  his  next  attack  roll  against  that  opponent  or  a  
+2 bonus to AC against that opponent’s next attack (your choice), as 
long  as  that  attack  comes  before  the  beginning  of  your  next  turn.  
Multiple  characters  can  aid  the  same  friend,  and  similar  bonuses  
stack. 
You  can  also  use  this  standard  action  to  help  a  friend  in  other  
ways, such as when he is affected by a hypnotism spell or a sleep spell, 
or to assist another character’s skill check (see page 65). 
 
BULL RUSH 
You can make a bull rush as a standard action (an attack) or as part of 
a  charge  (see  Charge,  below).  When  you  make  a  bull  rush,  you  
attempt to push an opponent straight back instead of damaging him. 
You  can  only  bull  rush  an  opponent  who  is  one  size  category  larger  
than you, the same size, or smaller. 
Initiating  a  Bull  Rush:  First,  you  move  into  the  defender’s  
space. Doing this provokes an attack of opportunity from each oppo-
nent  that  threatens  you,  including  the  defender.  (If  you  have  the  
Improved Bull Rush feat, you don’t provoke an attack of opportunity 
from  the  defender.)  Any  attack  of  opportunity  made  by  anyone  
other  than  the  defender  against  you  during  a  bull  rush  has  a  25%  
chance of accidentally targeting the defender instead, and any attack 
of  opportunity  by  anyone  other  than  you  against  the  defender  like-
wise  has  a  25%  chance  of  accidentally  targeting  you.  (When  some-
one  makes  an  attack  of  opportunity,  make  the  attack  roll  and  then  
roll to see whether the attack went astray.) 
Second,  you  and  the  defender  make  opposed  Strength  checks.  
You  each  add  a  +4  bonus  for  each  size  category  you  are  larger  than  
Medium  or  a  –4  penalty  for  each  size  category  you  are  smaller  than  
Medium. You get a +2 bonus if you are charging. The defender gets a 
+4  bonus  if  he  has  more  than  two  legs  or  is  otherwise  exceptionally  
stable (such as a dwarf). 
Bull  Rush  Results:  If  you  beat  the  defender’s  Strength  check  
result,  you  push  him  back  5  feet.  If  you  wish  to  move  with  the  de-
fender, you can push him back an additional 5 feet for each 5 points 
by  which  your  check  result  is  greater  than  the  defender’s  check  
result.  You  can’t,  however,  exceed  your  normal  movement  limit.  
(Note:  The  defender  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity  if  he  is  moved.  
So  do  you,  if  you  move  with  him.  The  two  of  you  do  not  provoke  
attacks of opportunity from each other, however.) 
If you fail to beat the defender’s Strength check result, you move 
5  feet  straight  back  to  where  you  were  before  you  moved  into  his  
space. If that space is occupied, you fall prone in that space. 
 
CHARGE 
Charging is a special full-round action that allows you to move up to 
twice  your  speed  and  attack  during  the  action.  However,  it  carries  
tight restrictions on how you can move. 
Movement   During   a   Charge:   You   must   move   before   your   
attack, not after. You must move at least 10 feet (2 squares) and may 
move up to double your speed directly toward the designated oppo-
nent. You must have a clear path toward the opponent, and nothing 
can hinder your movement (such as difficult terrain or obstacles). 
Here’s what it means to have a clear path. First, you must move to 
the  closest  space  from  which  you  can  attack  the  opponent.  (If  this  
space is occupied or otherwise blocked, you can’t charge.) Second, if 
any line from your starting space to the ending space passes through 
a  square  that  blocks  movement  (such  as  a  wall),  slows  movement  
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
155
(such  as  difficult  terrain),  or  contains  a  creature  (even  an  ally),  you  
can’t charge. (Helpless creatures don’t stop a charge.) 
If you don’t have line of sight to the opponent at the start of your 
turn, you can’t charge that opponent. 
You can’t take a 5-foot step in the same round as a charge. 
If you are able to take only a standard action or a move action on 
your turn, you can still charge, but you are only allowed to move up 
to your speed (instead of up to double your speed). You can’t use this 
option  unless  you  are  restricted  to  taking  only  a  standard  action  or  
move action on your turn (such as during a surprise round). 
Attacking  on  a  Charge:  After  moving,  you  may  make  a  single  
melee  attack.  Since  you  can  use  the  momentum  of  the  charge  in  
your favor, you get a +2 bonus on the attack roll. Since a charge is a 
bit  reckless,  you  also  take  a  –2  penalty  to  your  AC  until  the  start  of  
your next turn. 
A charging character gets a +2 bonus on the Strength check made 
to  bull  rush  or  overrun  an  opponent  (see  Bull  Rush,  above,  and  
Overrun, below). 
Even if you have extra attacks, such as from having a high enough 
base  attack  bonus  or  from  using  multiple  weapons,  you  only  get  to  
make one attack during a charge. 
Lances  and  Charge  Attacks:  A  lance  deals  double  damage  if  
employed by a mounted character in a charge. 
Weapons  Readied  against  a  Charge:  Spears,  tridents,  and  cer-
tain other piercing weapons deal double damage when readied (set) 
and used against a charging character (see Table 7–5: Weapons, page 
116, and Ready, page 160). 
 
DISARM 
As a melee attack, you may attempt to disarm your opponent. If you 
do  so  with  a  weapon,  you  knock  the  opponent’s  weapon  out  of  his  
hands and to the ground. If you attempt the disarm while unarmed, 
you end up with the weapon in your hand. 
If  you’re  attempting  to  disarm  a  melee  weapon,  follow  the  steps  
outlined here. If the item you are attempting to disarm isn’t a melee 
weapon  (for  instance,  a  bow  or  a  wand),  the  defender  may  still  
oppose you with an attack roll, but takes a penalty and can’t attempt 
to disarm you in return if your attempt fails. 
Step   1:   Attack   of   Opportunity.   You   provoke   an   attack   of   
opportunity  from  the  target  you  are  trying  to  disarm.  (If  you  have  
the  Improved  Disarm  feat,  you  don’t  incur  an  attack  of  opportunity  
for making a disarm attempt.) If the defender’s attack of opportunity 
deals any damage, your disarm attempt fails. 
Step  2:  Opposed  Rolls.  You  and  the  defender  make  opposed  at-
tack  rolls  with  your  respective  weapons.  The  wielder  of  a  two-
handed weapon on a disarm attempt gets a +4 bonus on this roll, and 
the wielder of a light weapon takes a –4 penalty. (An unarmed strike 
is considered a light weapon, so you always take a penalty when try-
ing to disarm an opponent by using an unarmed strike.) If the com-
batants  are  of  different  sizes,  the  larger  combatant  gets  a  bonus  on  
the  attack  roll  of  +4  per  difference  in  size  category.  If  the  targeted  
item  isn’t  a  melee  weapon,  the  defender  takes  a  –4  penalty  on  the  
roll. 
Step  Three:  Consequences.  If  you  beat  the  defender,  the  de-
fender  is  disarmed.  If  you  attempted  the  disarm  action  unarmed,  
you   now   have   the   weapon.   If   you   were   armed,   the   defender’s   
weapon is on the ground in the defender’s square. 
If  you  fail  on  the  disarm  attempt,  the  defender  may  immediately  
react and attempt to disarm you with the same sort of opposed melee 
attack  roll.  His  attempt  does  not  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity  
from you. If he fails his disarm attempt, you do not subsequently get 
a free disarm attempt against him. 
Note:  A  defender  wearing  spiked  gauntlets  (page  118)  can’t  be  
disarmed.  A  defender  using  a  weapon  attached  to  a  locked  gauntlet  
(page 124) gets a +10 bonus to resist being disarmed. 
 
Grabbing Items 
You  can  use  a  disarm  action  to  snatch  an  item  worn  by  the  target  
(such as a necklace or a pair of goggles). If you want to have the item 
in your hand, the disarm must be made as an unarmed attack. If the 
item is poorly secured or otherwise easy to snatch or cut away (such 
as  a  loose  cloak  or  a  brooch  pinned  to  the  front  of  a  tunic),  the  
attacker gets a +4 bonus. Unlike on a normal disarm attempt, failing 
the  attempt  doesn’t  allow  the  defender  to  attempt  to  disarm  you.  
This  otherwise  functions  identically  to  a  disarm  attempt,  as  noted  
above. 
You  can’t  snatch  an  item  that  is  well  secured,  such  as  a  ring  or  
bracelet,  unless  you  have  pinned  the  wearer  (see  Grapple).  Even  
then, the defender gains a +4 bonus on his roll to resist the attempt. 
 
FEINT 
As  a  standard  action,  you  can  try  to  mislead  an  opponent  in  melee  
combat  so  that  he  can’t  dodge  your  next  attack  effectively.  To  feint,  
make a Bluff check opposed by a Sense Motive check by your target. 
The  target  may  add  his  base  attack  bonus  to  this  Sense  Motive  
check. If your Bluff check result exceeds your target’s Sense Motive 
check result, the next melee attack you make against the target does 
not  allow  him  to  use  his  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  (if  any).  This  attack  
must be made on or before your next turn. 
Feinting  in  this  way  against  a  nonhumanoid  is  difficult  because  
it’s  harder  to  read  a  strange  creature’s  body  language;  you  take  a  –4  
penalty. Against a creature of animal Intelligence (1 or 2), you take a 
–8 penalty. Against a nonintelligent creature, it’s impossible. 
Feinting in combat does not provoke attacks of opportunity. 
Feinting  as  a  Move  Action:  With  the  Improved  Feint  feat,  you  
can attempt a feint as a move action instead of as a standard action. 
 
GRAPPLE 
Grappling  means  wrestling  and  struggling  hand-to-hand.  It’s  tricky  
to  perform,  but  sometimes  you  want  to  pin  foes  instead  of  killing  
them,   and   sometimes   you   have   no   choice   in   the   matter.   For   
monsters,  grappling  can  mean  trapping  you  in  a  toothy  maw  (the  
purple  worm’s  favorite  tactic)  or  holding  you  down  so  it  can  claw  
you to pieces (the dire lion’s trick). 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
156 
Grapple Checks 
Repeatedly  in  a  grapple,  you  need  to  make  opposed  grapple  checks  
against an opponent. A grapple check is like a melee attack roll. Your 
attack bonus on a grapple check is: 
 
Base attack bonus + Strength modifier + special size modifier 
 
Special  Size  Modifier:  The  special  size  modifier  for  a  grapple  
check is as follows: Colossal +16, Gargantuan +12, Huge +8, Large +4, 
Medium  +0,  Small  –4,  Tiny  –8,  Diminutive  –12,  Fine  –16.  Use  this  
number  in  place  of  the  normal  size  modifier  you  use  when  making  
an attack roll. 
 
Starting a Grapple 
To  start  a  grapple,  you  need  to  grab  and  hold  your  target.  Starting  a  
grapple  requires  a  successful  melee  attack  roll.  If  you  get  multiple  
attacks,   you   can   attempt   to   start   a   grapple   multiple   times   (at   
successively lower base attack bonuses). 
Step 1: Attack of Opportunity. You provoke an attack of oppor-
tunity  from  the  target  you  are  trying  to  grapple.  If  the  attack  of  
opportunity  deals  damage,  the  grapple  attempt  fails.  (Certain  mon-
sters  do  not  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity  when  they  attempt  to  
grapple,  nor  do  characters  with  the  Improved  Grapple  feat.)  If  the  
attack of opportunity misses or fails to deal damage, proceed to Step 
2. 
Step 2: Grab. You make a melee touch attack to grab the target. If 
you  fail  to  hit  the  target,  the  grapple  attempt  fails.  If  you  succeed,  
proceed to Step 3. 
Step  3:  Hold. Make an opposed grapple check as a free action. If 
you  succeed,  you  and  your  target  are  now  grappling,  and  you  deal  
damage to the target as if with an unarmed strike. 
If you lose, you fail to start the grapple. You automatically lose an 
attempt  to  hold  if  the  target  is  two  or  more  size  categories  larger  
than you are. 
In  case  of  a  tie,  the  combatant  with  the  higher  grapple  check  
modifier wins. If this is a tie, roll again to break the tie. 
Step  4:  Maintain  Grapple.  To  maintain  the  grapple  for  later  
rounds,  you  must  move  into  the  target’s  space.  (This  movement  is  
free  and  doesn’t  count  as  part  of  your  movement  in  the  round.)  
Moving,    as    normal,    provokes    attacks    of    opportunity    from    
threatening opponents, but not from your target. 
If  you  can’t  move  into  your  target’s  space,  you  can’t  maintain  the  
grapple and must immediately let go of the target. To grapple again, 
you must begin at Step 1. 
 
Grappling Consequences 
While  you’re  grappling,  your  ability  to  attack  others  and  defend  
yourself is limited. 
No  Threatened  Squares:  You  don’t  threaten  any  squares  while  
grappling. 
No  Dexterity  Bonus:  You  lose  your  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  (if  
you have one) against opponents you aren’t grappling. (You can still 
use it against opponents you are grappling.) 
No  Movement:  You  can’t  move  normally  while  grappling.  You  
may, however, make an opposed grapple check (see below) to move 
while grappling. 
 
If You’re Grappling 
When you are grappling (regardless of who started the grapple), you 
can perform any of the following actions. Some of these actions take 
the place of an attack (rather than being a standard action or a move 
action).  If  your  base  attack  bonus  allows  you  multiple  attacks,  you  
can attempt one of these actions in place of each of your attacks, but 
at successively lower base attack bonuses. 
Activate a Magic Item: You can activate a magic item, as long as 
the  item  doesn’t  require  a  spell  completion  trigger.  You  don’t  need  
to make a grapple check to activate the item. 
Attack   Your   Opponent:   You   can   make   an   attack   with   an   
unarmed  strike,  natural  weapon,  or  light  weapon  against  another  
character  you  are  grappling.  You  take  a  –4  penalty  on  such  attacks.  
You can’t attack with two weapons while grappling, even if both are 
light weapons. 
Cast  a  Spell:  You  can  attempt  to  cast  a  spell  while  grappling  or  
even while pinned (see below), provided its casting time is no more 
than  1  standard  action,  it  has  no  somatic  component,  and  you  have  
in  hand  any  material  components  or  focuses  you  might  need.  Any  
spell  that  requires  precise  and  careful  action,  such  as  drawing  a  
circle  with  powdered  silver  for  protection  from  evil,  is  impossible  to  
cast while grappling or being pinned. If the spell is one that you can 
cast while grappling, you must make a Concentration check (DC 20 
+  spell  level)  or  lose  the  spell.  You  don’t  have  to  make  a  successful  
grapple check to cast the spell. 
Damage Your Opponent: While grappling, you can deal damage 
to your opponent equivalent to an unarmed strike. Make an opposed 
grapple  check  in  place  of  an  attack.  If  you  win,  you  deal  nonlethal  
damage  as  normal  for  your  unarmed  strike  (1d3  points  for  Medium  
attackers or 1d2 points for Small attackers, plus Strength modifiers). 
If  you  want  to  deal  lethal  damage,  you  take  a  –4  penalty  on  your  
grapple check. 
Exception:  Monks  deal  more  damage  on  an  unarmed  strike  than  
other   characters,   and   the   damage   is   lethal.   However,   they   can   
choose  to  deal  their  damage  as  nonlethal  damage  when  grappling  
without  taking  the  usual  –4  penalty  for  changing  lethal  damage  to  
nonlethal damage (see Dealing Nonlethal Damage, page 146). 
Draw  a  Light  Weapon:  You  can  draw  a  light  weapon  as  a  move  
action with a successful grapple check. 
Escape  from  Grapple:  You  can  escape  a  grapple  by  winning  an  
opposed  grapple  check  in  place  of  making  an  attack.  You  can  make  
an  Escape  Artist  check  in  place  of  your  grapple  check  if  you  so  
desire,  but  this  requires  a  standard  action.  If  more  than  one  oppo-
nent is grappling you, your grapple check result has to beat all their 
individual  check  results  to  escape.  (Opponents  don’t  have  to  try  to  
hold  you  if  they  don’t  want  to.)  If  you  escape,  you  finish  the  action  
by moving into any space adjacent to your opponent(s). 
Move: You can move half your speed (bringing all others engaged 
in the grapple with you) by winning an opposed grapple check. This 
requires a standard action, and you must beat all the other individual 
check results to move the grapple. 
Note: You get a +4 bonus on your grapple check to move a pinned 
opponent, but only if no one else is involved in the grapple. 
Retrieve  a  Spell  Component:  You  can  produce  a  spell  compo-
nent from your pouch while grappling by using a full-round action. 
Doing so does not require a successful grapple check. 
Pin  Your  Opponent: You can hold your opponent immobile for 
1 round by winning an opposed grapple check (made in place of an 
attack). Once you have an opponent pinned, you have a few options 
available to you (see below). 
Break Another’s Pin: If you are grappling an opponent who has 
another  character  pinned,  you  can  make  an  opposed  grapple  check  
in  place  of  an  attack.  If  you  win,  you  break  the  hold  that  the  
opponent   has   over   the   other   character.   The   character   is   still   
grappling, but is no longer pinned. 
Use  Opponent’s  Weapon:  If  your  opponent  is  holding  a  light  
weapon,  you  can  use  it  to  attack  him.  Make  an  opposed  grapple  
check (in place of an attack). If you win, make an attack roll with the 
weapon   with   a   –4   penalty   (doing   this   doesn’t   require   another   
action). You don’t gain possession of the weapon by performing this 
action. 
 
If You’re Pinning an Opponent 
Once  you’ve  pinned  your  opponent,  he’s  at  your  mercy.  However,  
you  don’t  have  quite  the  freedom  of  action  that  you  did  while  grap-
pling.  You  can  attempt  to  damage  your  opponent  with  an  opposed  
grapple  check,  you  can  attempt  to  use  your  opponent’s  weapon  
against  him,  or  you  can  attempt  to  move  the  grapple  (all  described  
above).  At  your  option,  you  can  prevent  a  pinned  opponent  from  
speaking. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
157
You can use a disarm action to remove or grab away a well secured 
object worn by a pinned opponent, but he gets a +4 bonus on his roll 
to resist your attempt (see Disarm, page 155). 
You may voluntarily release a pinned character as a free action; if 
you  do  so,  you  are  no  longer  considered  to  be  grappling  that  char-
acter (and vice versa). 
You  can’t  draw  or  use  a  weapon  (against  the  pinned  character  or  
any   other   character),   escape   another’s   grapple,   retrieve   a   spell   
component, pin another character, or break another’s pin while you 
are pinning an opponent. 
 
If You’re Pinned by an Opponent 
When an opponent has pinned you, you are held immobile (but not 
helpless) for 1 round. While you’re pinned, you take a –4 penalty to 
your AC against opponents other than the one pinning you. At your 
opponent’s  option,  you  may  also  be  unable  to  speak.  On  your  turn,  
you  can  try  to  escape  the  pin  by  making  an  opposed  grapple  check  
in  place  of  an  attack.  You  can  make  an  Escape  Artist  check  in  place  
of  your  grapple  check  if  you  want,  but  this  requires  a  standard  
action. If you win, you escape the pin, but you’re still grappling. 
 
Joining a Grapple 
If  your  target  is  already  grappling  someone  else,  you  can  use  an  
attack  to  start  a  grapple,  as  above,  except  that  the  target  doesn’t  get  
an  attack  of  opportunity  against  you,  and  your  grab  automatically  
succeeds. You still have to make a successful opposed grapple check 
to become part of the grapple. 
If there are multiple opponents involved in the grapple, you pick 
one to make the opposed grapple check against. 
 
Multiple Grapplers 
Several  combatants  can  be  in  a  single  grapple.  Up  to  four  combat-
ants  can  grapple  a  single  opponent  in  a  given  round.  Creatures  that  
are  one  or  more  size  categories  smaller  than  you  count  for  half,  
creatures  that  are  one  size  category  larger  than  you  count  double,  
and creatures two or more size categories larger count quadruple. 
When  you  are  grappling  with  multiple  opponents,  you  choose  
one  opponent  to  make  an  opposed  check  against.  The  exception  is  
an  attempt  to  escape  from  the  grapple;  to  successfully  escape,  your  
grapple check must beat the check results of each opponent. 
 
MOUNTED COMBAT 
Riding  a  mount  into  battle  gives  you  several  advantages  (see  the  
Ride skill, page 80, and the Mounted Combat feat, page 98). 
Horses  in  Combat:  Warhorses  and  warponies  can  serve  readily  
as  combat  steeds.  Light  horses,  ponies,  and  heavy  horses,  however,  
are  frightened  by  combat.  If  you  don’t  dismount,  you  must  make  a  
DC  20  Ride  check  each  round  as  a  move  action  to  control  such  a  
horse.  If  you  succeed,  you  can  perform  a  standard  action  after  the  
move action. If you fail, the move action becomes a full round action 
and you can’t do anything else until your next turn. 
Your  mount  acts  on  your  initiative  count  as  you  direct  it.  You  
move at its speed, but the mount uses its action to move. 
A  horse  (not  a  pony)  is  a  Large  creature  (see  Big  and  Little  Crea-
tures  in  Combat,  page  149),  and  thus  takes  up  a  space  10  feet  (2  
squares)  across.  For  simplicity,  assume  that  you  share  your  mount’s  
space during combat. 
Combat  while  Mounted:  With  a  DC  5  Ride  check,  you  can  
guide your mount with your knees so as to use both hands to attack 
or defend yourself. This is a free action. 
When  you  attack  a  creature  smaller  than  your  mount  that  is  on  
foot,  you  get  the  +1  bonus  on  melee  attacks  for  being  on  higher  
ground. If your mount moves more than 5 feet, you can only make a 
single  melee  attack.  Essentially,  you  have  to  wait  until  the  mount  
gets to your enemy before attacking, so you can’t make a full attack. 
Even at your mount’s full speed, you don’t take any penalty on melee 
attacks while mounted. 
If  your  mount  charges,  you  also  take  the  AC  penalty  associated  
with  a  charge.  If  you  make  an  attack  at  the  end  of  the  charge,  you  
receive the bonus gained from the charge. When charging on horse-
back, you deal double damage with a lance (see Charge, page 154). 
You can use ranged weapons while your mount is taking a double 
move,  but  at  a  –4  penalty  on  the  attack  roll.  You  can  use  ranged  
weapons  while  your  mount  is  running  (quadruple  speed),  at  a  –8  
penalty.  In  either  case,  you  make  the  attack  roll  when  your  mount  
has completed half its movement. You can make a full attack with a 
ranged weapon while your mount is moving. Likewise, you can take 
move actions normally, so that, for instance, you can load and fire a 
light crossbow in a round while your mount is moving. 
Casting Spells while Mounted: You can cast a spell normally if 
your  mount  moves  up  to  a  normal  move  (its  speed)  either  before  or  
after  you  cast.  If  you  have  your  mount  move  both  before  and  after  
you  cast  a  spell,  then  you’re  casting  the  spell  while  the  mount  is  
moving,  and  you  have  to  make  a  Concentration  check  due  to  the  
vigorous motion (DC 10 + spell level) or lose the spell. If the mount 
is running (quadruple speed), you can cast a spell when your mount 
has  moved  up  to  twice  its  speed,  but  your  Concentration  check  is  
more difficult due to the violent motion (DC 15 + spell level). 
If  Your  Mount  Falls  in  Battle:  If  your  mount  falls,  you  have  to  
succeed  on  a  DC  15  Ride  check  to  make  a  soft  fall  and  take  no  
damage. If the check fails, you take 1d6 points of damage. 
If You Are Dropped: If you are knocked unconscious, you have a 
50%  chance  to  stay  in  the  saddle  (or  75%  if  you’re  in  a  military  
saddle). Otherwise you fall and take 1d6 points of damage. Without 
you to guide it, your mount avoids combat. 
 
OVERRUN 
You  can  attempt  an  overrun  as  a  standard  action  taken  during  your  
move, or as part of a charge. (In general, you cannot take a standard 
action  during  a  move;  this  is  an  exception.)  With  an  overrun,  you  
attempt  to  plow  past  or  over  your  opponent  (and  move  through  his  
square) as you move. You can only overrun an opponent who is one 
size  category  larger  than  you,  the  same  size,  or  smaller.  You  can  
make only one overrun attempt per round. 
If you’re attempting to overrun an opponent, follow these steps. 
Step 1: Attack of Opportunity.  Since  you  begin  the  overrun  by  
moving   into   the   defender’s   space,   you   provoke   an   attack   of   
opportunity from the defender. 
Step  2:  Opponent  Avoids?  The  defender  has  the  option  to  
simply avoid you. If he avoids you, he doesn’t suffer any ill effect. If 
you  were  attempting  the  overrun  as  part  of  a  charge,  you  may  keep  
moving.   (You   can   always   move   through   a   square   occupied   by   
someone  who  lets  you  by.)  In  either  case,  the  overrun  attempt  
doesn’t   count   against   your   actions   this   round   (except   for   any   
movement  required  to  enter  the  opponent’s  square).  If  your  oppo-
nent doesn’t avoid you, move to Step 3. 
Step 3: Opponent Blocks? If your opponent blocks you, make a 
Strength  check  opposed  by  the  defender’s  Dexterity  or  Strength  
check    (whichever    ability    score    has    the    higher    modifier).    A    
combatant gets a +4 bonus on the check for every size category he is 
larger  than  Medium  or  a  –4  penalty  for  every  size  category  he  is  
smaller  than  Medium.  You  gain  a  +2  bonus  on  your  Strength  check  
if  you  made  the  overrun  as  part  of  a  charge.  The  defender  gets  a  +4  
bonus  on  his  check  if  he  has  more  than  two  legs  or  is  otherwise  
more  stable  than  a  normal  humanoid  (such  as  a  dwarf).  If  you  win,  
you   knock   the   defender   prone.   If   you   lose,   the   defender   may   
immediately  react  and  make  a  Strength  check  opposed  by  your  
Dexterity  or  Strength  check  (including  the  size  modifiers  noted  
above, but no other modifiers) to try to knock you prone. 
Step  4:  Consequences.  If  you  succeed  in  knocking  your  oppo-
nent prone, you can continue your movement as normal. If you fail 
and  are  knocked  prone  in  turn,  you  have  to  move  5  feet  back  the  
way  you  came  and  fall  prone,  ending  your  movement  there.  If  you  
fail but are not knocked prone, you have to move 5 feet back the way 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
158 
you  came,  ending  your  movement  there.  If  that  square  is  occupied,  
you fall prone in that square. 
Improved  Overrun:  If  you  have  the  Improved  Overrun  feat,  
your target may not choose to avoid you. 
Mounted  Overrun  (Trample):  If  you  attempt  an  overrun  while  
mounted,  your  mount  makes  the  Strength  check  to  determine  the  
success or failure of the overrun attack (and applies its size modifier, 
rather  than  yours).  If  you  have  the  Trample  feat  and  attempt  an  
overrun  while  mounted,  your  target  may  not  choose  to  avoid  you,  
and  if  you  knock  your  opponent  prone  with  the  overrun,  your  
mount may make one hoof attack against your opponent. 
 
SUNDER 
You  can  use  a  melee  attack  with  a  slashing  or  bludgeoning  weapon  
to strike a weapon or shield that your opponent is holding. If you’re 
attempting  to  sunder  a  weapon  or  shield,  follow  the  steps  outlined  
here.   (Attacking   held   objects   other   than   weapons   or   shields   is   
covered below.) 
 
Table 8–8: Common Armor, Weapon, and Shield 
Hardness and Hit Points 
Weapon or Shield Example Hardness HP
1
 
Light blade  Short sword 10 2 
One-handed blade Longsword 10 5 
Two-handed blade Greatsword 10 10 
Light metal-hafted weapon Light mace 10 10 
One-handed metal-hafted weapon  Heavy mace 10 20 
Light hafted weapon  Handaxe 5 2 
One-handed hafted weapon Battleaxe 5 5 
Two-handed hafted weapon Greataxe 5 10 
Projectile weapon Crossbow 5 5 
Armor                                                —                                                special
2
      armor      
   bonus × 5 
Buckler                                              —                                              10                                              5                                              
Light wooden shield — 5 7 
Heavy wooden shield — 5 15 
Light steel shield — 10 10 
Heavy steel shield — 10 20 
Tower shield — 5 20 
1 The hp value given is for Medium armor, weapons, and shields. 
Divide by 2 for each size category of the item smaller than Medium, 
or multiply it by 2 for each size category larger than Medium. 
2 Varies by material; see Table 9–9, page 166.
 
 
Step   1:   Attack   of   Opportunity.   You   provoke   an   attack   of   
opportunity  from  the  target  whose  weapon  or  shield  you  are  trying  
to sunder. (If you have the Improved Sunder feat, you don’t incur an 
attack of opportunity for making the attempt.) 
Step  2:  Opposed  Rolls.  You  and  the  defender  make  opposed  
attack  rolls  with  your  respective  weapons.  The  wielder  of  a  two-
handed weapon on a sunder attempt gets a +4 bonus on this roll, and 
the  wielder  of  a  light  weapon  takes  a  –4  penalty.  If  the  combatants  
are of different sizes, the larger combatant gets a bonus on the attack 
roll of +4 per difference in size category. 
Step 3: Consequences. If you beat the defender, you have landed 
a  good  blow.  Roll  damage  and  deal  it  to  the  weapon  or  shield.  See  
Table  8–8:  Common  Armor,  Weapon,  and  Shield  Hardness  and  Hit  
Points to determine how much damage you must deal to destroy the 
weapon or shield. 
If you fail the sunder attempt, you don’t deal any damage. 
Sundering  a  Carried  or  Worn  Object:  You  don’t  use  an  opposed  
attack roll to damage a carried or worn object. Instead, just make an 
attack  roll  against  the  object’s  AC.  A  carried  or  worn  object’s  AC  is  
equal  to  10  +  its  size  modifier  +  the  Dexterity  modifier  of  the  carry-
ing  or  wearing  character.  Attacking  a  carried  or  worn  object  provo-
kes  an  attack  of  opportunity  just  as  attacking  a  held  object  does.  To  
attempt to snatch away an item worn by a defender (such as a cloak 
or a pair of goggles) rather than damage it, see Disarm, page 155. You 
can’t sunder armor worn by another character. 
 
THROW SPLASH WEAPON 
A  splash  weapon  is  a  ranged  weapon  that  breaks  on  impact,  splash-
ing  or  scattering  its  contents  over  its  target  and  nearby  creatures  or  
objects. Most splash weapons consist of liquids, such as acid or holy 
water, in breakable vials such as glass flasks. (See Special Substances 
and  Items,  page  128,  for  particulars  about  several  different  splash  
weapons.) 
To  attack  with  a  splash  weapon,  make  a  ranged  touch  attack  
against  the  target.  Thrown  weapons  require  no  weapon  proficiency,  
so  you  don’t  take  the  –4  nonproficiency  penalty.  A  hit  deals  direct  
hit damage to the target, and splash damage to all creatures within 5 
feet of the target. 
You  can  instead  target  a  specific  grid  intersection.  Treat  this  as  a  
ranged  attack  against  AC  5.  However,  if  you  target  a  grid  intersec-
tion,  creatures  in  all  adjacent  squares  are  dealt  the  splash  damage,  
and  the  direct  hit  damage  is  not  dealt  to  any  creature.  (You  can’t  
target  a  grid  intersection  occupied  by  a  creature,  such  as  a  Large  or  
larger creature; in this case, you’re aiming at the creature.) 
If  you  miss  the  target  (whether  aiming  at  a  creature  or  a  grid  
intersection),   roll   1d8.   This   determines   the   misdirection   of   the   
throw,  with  1  being  straight  back  at  you  and  2  through  8  counting  
clockwise  around  the  grid  intersection  or  target  creature.  Then,  
count  a  number  of  squares  in  the  indicated  direction  equal  to  the  
range increment of the throw. So, if you miss on a throw out to two 
range  increments  and  roll  a  1  to  determine  the  misdirection  of  the  
throw, the splash weapon lands on the intersection that is 2 squares 
away   from   the   target   in   the   direction   toward   you.   See   the   
accompanying diagram. 
After  you  determine  where  the  weapon  landed,  it  deals  splash  
damage to all creatures in adjacent squares. 
 
TRIP 
You can try to trip an opponent as an unarmed melee attack. You can 
only  trip  an  opponent  who  is  one  size  category  larger  than  you,  the  
same size, or smaller. 
Making  a  Trip  Attack:  Make  an  unarmed  melee  touch  attack  
against  your  target.  This  provokes  an  attack  of  opportunity  from  
your target as normal for unarmed attacks. 
If  your  attack  succeeds,  make  a  Strength  check  opposed  by  the  
defender’s  Dexterity  or  Strength  check  (whichever  ability  score  has  
the  higher  modifier).  A  combatant  gets  a  +4  bonus  for  every  size  
category  he  is  larger  than  Medium  or  a  –4  penalty  for  every  size  
category  he  is  smaller  than  Medium.  The  defender  gets  a  +4  bonus  
on his check if he has more than two legs or is otherwise more stable 
than  a  normal  humanoid  (such  as  a  dwarf).  If  you  win,  you  trip  the  
defender. If you lose, the defender may immediately react and make 
a Strength check opposed by your Dexterity or Strength check to try 
to trip you. 
Avoiding Attacks of Opportunity: If you have the Improved Trip feat, 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
159
or  if  you  are  tripping  with  a  weapon  (see  below),  you  don’t  provoke  
an attack of opportunity for making a trip attack. 
Being  Tripped  (Prone):  A  tripped  character  is  prone  (see  Table  
8–6: Armor Class Modifiers). Standing up is a move action. 
Tripping  a  Mounted  Opponent:  You  may  make  a  trip  attack  
against  a  mounted  opponent.  The  defender  may  make  a  Ride  check  
in place of his Dexterity or Strength check. If you succeed, you pull 
the rider from his mount. 
Tripping  with  a  Weapon:  Some  weapons,  including  the  spiked  
chain,  dire  flail,  heavy  flail,  light  flail,  guisarme,  halberd,  and  whip,  
can  be  used  to  make  trip  attacks.  In  this  case,  you  make  a  melee  
touch  attack  with  the  weapon  instead  of  an  unarmed  melee  touch  
attack,  and  you  don’t  provoke  an  attack  of  opportunity.  If  you  are  
tripped  during  your  own  trip  attempt,  you  can  drop  the  weapon  to  
avoid being tripped. 
 
TURN OR REBUKE UNDEAD 
Good  clerics  and  paladins  and  some  neutral  clerics  can  channel  
positive  energy,  which  can  halt,  drive  off  (rout),  or  destroy  undead.  
Evil  clerics  and  some  neutral  clerics  can  channel  negative  energy,  
which can halt, awe (rebuke), control (command), or bolster undead. 
Regardless of the effect, the general term for the activity is “turning.” 
When  attempting  to  exercise  their  divine  control  over  these  crea-
tures, characters make turning checks. 
 
Turning Checks 
Turning  undead  is  a  supernatural  ability  that  a  character  can  per-
form as a standard action. It does not provoke attacks of opportunity. 
You  must  present  your  holy  symbol  to  turn  undead.  Turning  is  
considered an attack. 
Times  per  Day:  You  may  attempt  to  turn  undead  a  number  of  
times per day equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier. You can increase 
this number by taking the Extra Turning feat (page 94). 
Range:  You  turn  the  closest  turnable  undead  first,  and  you  can’t  
turn undead that are more than 60 feet away or that have total cover 
relative  to  you.  You  don’t  need  line  of  sight  to  a  target,  but  you  do  
need line of effect (see page 176). 
Turning Check: The first thing you do is roll a turning check to 
see how powerful an undead creature you can turn. This is a Charis-
ma  check  (1d20  +  your  Charisma  modifier).  Table  8–9:  Turning  
Undead  gives  you  the  Hit  Dice  of  the  most  powerful  undead  you  
can affect, relative to your level. On a given turning attempt, you can 
turn  no  undead  creature  whose  Hit  Dice  exceed  the  result  on  this  
table. 
Turning  Damage:  If  your  roll  on  Table  8–9:  Turning  Undead  is  
high  enough  to  let  you  turn  at  least  some  of  the  undead  within  60  
feet,  roll  2d6  +  your  cleric  level  +  your  Charisma  modifier  for  turn-
ing damage. That’s how many total Hit Dice of undead you can turn. 
If   your   Charisma   score   is   average   or   low,   it’s   possible   (but   
unusual)  to  roll  fewer  Hit  Dice  of  undead  turned  than  indicated  on  
Table:  8–9  Turning  Undead.  For  instance,  1  1st-level  cleric  with  an  
average  Charisma  score  could  get  a  turning  check  result  of  19  
(cleric’s level +3, or 4 HD), which is enough to turn a wight, but then 
roll  only  3  on  his  turning  damage  roll—not  enough  to  turn  that  
wight after all. 
You  may  skip  over  already  turned  undead  that  are  still  within  
range, so that you do not waste your turning capacity on them. 
Effect  and  Duration  of  Turning: Turned undead flee from you 
by  the  best  and  fastest  means  available  to  them.  They  flee  for  10  
rounds (1 minute). If they cannot flee, they cower (giving any attack 
rolls  against  them  a  +2  bonus).  If  you  approach  within  10  feet  of  
them, however, they overcome being turned and act normally. (You 
can  stand  within  10  feet  without  breaking  the  turning  effect—you  
just  can’t  approach  them.)  You  can  attack  them  with  ranged  attacks  
(from  at  least  10  feet  away),  and  others  can  attack  them  in  any  
fashion, without breaking the turning effect. 
Destroying  Undead:  If  you  have  twice  as  many  levels  (or  more)  
as  the  undead  have  Hit  Dice,  you  destroy  any  that  you  would  
normally turn. 
Table 8–9: Turning Undead 
Turning Check Most Powerful Undead 
    Result Affected (Maximum Hit Dice) 
 0 or lower Cleric’s level – 4 
 1–3 Cleric’s level – 3 
 4–6 Cleric’s level – 2 
 7–9 Cleric’s level – 1 
    10–12    Cleric’s    level    
    13–15 Cleric’s level + 1 
    16–18 Cleric’s level + 2 
    19–21 Cleric’s level + 3 
22 or higher Cleric’s level + 4 
 
How Turning Works 
Jozan, the cleric, and his friends confront seven human zombies led 
by  a  wight.  Calling  on  the  power  of  Pelor,  Jozan  raises  his  sun  disk  
and attempts to drive the undead away. 
First, he makes a turning check (1d20 + Cha modifier) to see what 
the most powerful undead creature is that he can turn in this action. 
His result is 9, so he can only turn undead that have fewer Hit Dice 
than he has levels. Jozan is 3rd level, so on this attempt, he can turn 
creatures  with  2  Hit  Dice  (such  as  human  zombies)  or  1  Hit  Die  
(such  as  human  skeletons)  but  nothing  with  more  than  2  Hit  Dice  
(such  as  the  wight,  which  has  4  HD).  He  does  not  have  twice  as  
many  levels  as  either  the  zombies  or  wight,  so  he  will  not  destroy  
any of them. 
Next, he rolls his turning damage (2d6 + Jozan’s level + Cha mod-
ifier)  to  see  how  many  total  Hit  Dice  of  creatures  he  can  turn.  His  
result is 11, enough to turn the five closest zombies (accounting for 
10 HD out of the maximum of 11). The remaining two zombies and 
the wight are unaffected. 
On Jozan’s next turn, he attempts to turn undead again. This time, 
his  turning  check  result  is  21—enough  to  turn  undead  creatures  of  
up to 6 HD (his level + 3). His turning damage roll is only 7, though, 
so  he  can  only  turn  7  HD  worth  of  creatures.  He  turns  the  two  
nearest undead (the remaining 2 HD zombies), but the remaining 3 
HD worth of turning isn’t enough to turn the 4-HD wight. 
 
Evil Clerics and Undead 
Evil  clerics  channel  negative  energy  to  rebuke  (awe)  or  command  
(control)  undead  rather  than  channeling  positive  energy  to  turn  or  
destroy  them.  An  evil  cleric  makes  the  equivalent  of  a  turning  
check. Undead that would be turned are rebuked instead, and those 
that would be destroyed are commanded. 
Rebuked:  A  rebuked  undead  creature  cowers  as  if  in  awe  (attack  
rolls against the creature get a +2 bonus). The effect lasts 10 rounds. 
Commanded:   A   commanded   undead   creature   is   under   the   
mental  control  of  the  evil  cleric.  The  cleric  must  take  a  standard  
action  to  give  mental  orders  to  a  commanded  undead.  At  any  one  
time,  the  cleric  may  command  any  number  of  undead  whose  total  
Hit  Dice  do  not  exceed  his  level.  He  may  voluntarily  relinquish  
command on any commanded undead creature or creatures in order 
to command new ones. 
Dispelling Turning: An evil cleric may channel negative energy 
to  dispel  a  good  cleric’s  turning  effect.  The  evil  cleric  makes  a  
turning check as if attempting to rebuke the undead. If the turning 
check result is equal to or greater than the turning check result that 
the  good  cleric  scored  when  turning  the  undead,  then  the  undead  
are  no  longer  turned.  The  evil  cleric  rolls  turning  damage  of  2d6  +  
cleric level + Charisma modifier to see how many Hit Dice worth of 
undead he can affect in this way (as if he were rebuking them). 
Bolstering   Undead:   An   evil   cleric   may   also   bolster   undead   
creatures against turning in advance. He makes a turning check as if 
attempting  to  rebuke  the  undead,  but  the  Hit  Dice  result  on  Table  
8–9:  Turning  Undead  becomes  the  undead  creatures’  effective  Hit  
Dice  as  far  as  turning  is  concerned  (provided  the  result  is  higher  
than  the  creatures’  actual  Hit  Dice).  The  bolstering  lasts  10  rounds.  
An evil undead cleric can bolster himself in this manner. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
160 
Neutral Clerics and Undead 
A cleric of neutral alignment can either turn undead but not rebuke 
them,  or  rebuke  undead  but  not  turn  them.  See  Turn  or  Rebuke  
Undead, page 33, for more information. 
Even if a cleric is neutral, channeling positive energy is a good act 
and channeling negative energy is evil. 
 
Paladins and Undead 
Beginning  at  4th  level,  paladins  can  turn  undead  as  if  they  were  
clerics of three levels lower than they actually are. 
 
Turning Other Creatures 
Some  clerics  have  the  ability  to  turn  creatures  other  than  undead.  
For example, a cleric with the Fire domain can turn or destroy water 
creatures (as if he were a good cleric turning undead) and rebuke or 
command   fire   creatures   (as   if   he   were   an   evil   cleric   rebuking   
undead). The turning check result is determined as normal. 
 
Other Uses for Positive or Negative Energy 
Positive  or  negative  energy  may  have  uses  other  than  affecting  
undead.  For  example,  a  holy  site  might  be  guarded  by  a  magic  door  
that  opens  for  any  good  cleric  who  can  make  a  turning  check  high  
enough  to  affect  a  3-HD  undead  and  that  shatters  for  an  evil  cleric  
who can make a similar check. 
 
TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING 
If you wield a second weapon in your off hand, you can get one extra 
attack per round with that weapon. Fighting in this way is very hard, 
however,  and  you  suffer  a  –6  penalty  with  your  regular  attack  or  
attacks with your primary hand and a –10 penalty to the attack with 
your off hand. You can reduce these penalties in two ways: 
 If  your  off-hand  weapon  is  light,  the  penalties  are  reduced  by  2  
each. (An unarmed strike is always considered light.) 
 The Two-Weapon Fighting feat lessens the primary hand penalty 
by 2, and the off-hand penalty by 6. 
Table   8–10:   Two-Weapon   Fighting   Penalties   summarizes   the   
interaction of all these factors. 
 
Table 8–10: Two-Weapon Fighting Penalties 
Circumstances Primary Hand Off Hand 
Normal penalties –6 –10 
Off-hand weapon is light –4 –8 
Two-Weapon Fighting feat –4 –4 
Off-hand weapon is light and –2 –2 
Two-Weapon Fighting feat
 
 
Double  Weapons:  You  can  use  a  double  weapon  to  make  an  
extra  attack  with  the  off-hand  end  of  the  weapon  as  if  you  were  
fighting  with  two  weapons.  The  penalties  apply  as  if  the  off-hand  
end of the weapon were a light weapon. 
Thrown  Weapons:  The  same  rules  apply  when  you  throw  a  
weapon  from  each  hand.  Treat  a  dart  or  shuriken  as  a  light  weapon  
when used in this manner, and treat a bolas, javelin, net, or sling as a 
one-handed weapon. 
 
SPECIAL INITIATIVE ACTIONS 
Here  are  ways  to  change  when  you  act  during  combat  by  altering  
your place in the initiative order. 
 
DELAY 
By  choosing  to  delay,  you  take  no  action  and  then  act  normally  on  
whatever  initiative  count  you  decide  to  act.  When  you  delay,  you  
voluntarily  reduce  your  own  initiative  result  for  the  rest  of  the  
combat.  When  your  new,  lower  initiative  count  comes  up  later  in  
the  same  round,  you  can  act  normally.  You  can  specify  this  new  
initiative  result  or  just  wait  until  some  time  later  in  the  round  and  
act then, thus fixing your new initiative count at that point. 
Delaying  is  useful  if  you  need  to  see  what  your  friends  or  oppo-
nents are going to do before deciding what to do yourself. The price 
you  pay  is  lost  initiative.  You  never  get  back  the  time  you  spend  
waiting to see what’s going to happen. You can’t, however, interrupt 
anyone else’s action (as you can with a readied action). 
Initiative  Consequences  of  Delaying:  Your  initiative  result  
becomes  the  count  on  which  you  took  the  delayed  action.  If  you  
come to your next action and have not yet performed an action, you 
don’t  get  to  take  a  delayed  action  (though  you  can  delay  again).  If  
you take a delayed action in the next round, before your regular turn 
comes  up,  your  initiative  count  rises  to  that  new  point  in  the  order  
of battle, and you do not get your regular action that round. 
 
READY 
The  ready  action  lets  you  prepare  to  take  an  action  later,  after  your  
turn  is  over  but  before  your  next  one  has  begun.  Readying  is  a  
standard   action.   It   does   not   provoke   an   attack   of   opportunity   
(though the action that you ready might do so). 
Readying  an  Action:  You  can  ready  a  standard  action,  a  move  
action, or a free action. To do so, specify the action you will take and 
the conditions under which you will take it. For example, you might 
specify  that  you  will  shoot  an  arrow  at  anyone  coming  through  a  
nearby  doorway.  Then,  any  time  before  your  next  action,  you  may  
take  the  readied  action  in  response  to  that  condition.  The  action  
occurs just before the action that triggers it. If the triggered action is 
part   of   another   character’s   activities,   you   interrupt   the   other   
character. Assuming he is still capable of doing so, he continues his 
actions once you complete your readied action. 
Your initiative result changes. For the rest of the encounter, your 
initiative  result  is  the  count  on  which  you  took  the  readied  action,  
and   you   act   immediately   ahead   of   the   character   whose   action   
triggered your readied action. 
You can take a 5-foot step as part of your readied action, but only 
if  you  don’t  otherwise  move  any  distance  during  the  round.  For  
instance, if you move up to an open door and then ready an action to 
swing  your  sword  at  whatever  comes  near,  you  can’t  take  a  5-foot  
step  along  with  the  readied  action  (since  you’ve  already  moved  in  
this round). 
Initiative  Consequences  of  Readying:  Your  initiative  result  
becomes  the  count  on  which  you  took  the  readied  action.  If  you  
come  to  your  next  action  and  have  not  yet  performed  your  readied  
action,  you  don’t  get  to  take  the  readied  action  (though  you  can  
ready  the  same  action  again).  If  you  take  your  readied  action  in  the  
next round, before your regular turn comes up, your initiative count 
rises to that new point in the order of battle, and you do not get your 
regular action that round. 
Distracting Spellcasters: You can ready an attack against a spell-
caster  with  the  trigger  “if  she  starts  casting  a  spell.”  If  you  damage  
the spellcaster, she may lose the spell she was trying to cast (as deter-
mined by her Concentration check result). 
Readying   to   Counterspell:   You   may   ready   a   counterspell   
against  a  spellcaster  (often  with  the  trigger  “if  she  starts  casting  a  
spell”).  In  this  case,  when  the  spellcaster  starts  a  spell,  you  get  a  
chance to identify it with a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell level). If 
you  do,  and  if  you  can  cast  that  same  spell  (are  able  to  cast  it  and  
have  it  prepared,  if  you  prepare  spells),  you  can  cast  the  spell  as  a  
counterspell  and  automatically  ruin  the  other  spellcaster’s  spell.  
Counterspelling  works  even  if  one  spell  is  divine  and  the  other  
arcane. 
A   spellcaster   can   use   dispel   magic   (page   223)   to   counterspell   
another spellcaster, but it doesn’t always work. 
Readying  a  Weapon  against  a  Charge:  You  can  ready  certain  
piercing  weapons,  setting  them  to  receive  charges  (see  Table  7–5:  
Weapons,  page  116).  A  readied  weapon  of  this  type  deals  double  
damage if you score a hit with it against a charging character. 
CHAPTER 8: 
COMBAT
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ourneying  from  place  to  place  is  as  much  a  part  of  the  
game  as  combat  or  magic.  This  chapter  covers  carrying  
capacity   and   encumbrance,   movement   overland   and   
through adventure sites, exploration, and treasure. 
 
CARRYING CAPACITY 
Encumbrance  rules  determine  how  much  a  character’s  armor  and  
equipment slow him or her down. Encumbrance comes in two parts: 
encumbrance by armor and encumbrance by total weight. 
Encumbrance  by  Armor:  A  character’s  armor  (as  described  on  
Table   7–6:   Armor   and   Shields,   page   123)   defines   his   or   her   
maximum  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC,  armor  check  penalty,  speed,  and  
running  speed.  Unless  your  character  is  weak  or  carrying  a  lot  of  
gear,  that’s  all  you  need  to  know.  The  extra  gear  your  character  
carries won’t slow him or her down any more than the armor already 
does. 
If  your  character  is  weak  or  carrying  a  lot  of  gear,  however,  then  
you’ll  need  to  calculate  encumbrance  by  weight.  Doing  so  is  most  
important when your character is trying to carry some heavy object. 
Weight:  If  you  want  to  determine  whether  your  character’s  gear  
is  heavy  enough  to  slow  him  or  her  down  more  than  the  armor  
already  does,  total  the  weight  of  all  the  character’s  items,  including  
armor,  weapons,  and  gear.  Compare  this  total  to  the  character’s  
Strength  on  Table  9–1:  Carrying  Capacity.  Depending  on  how  the  
weight  compares  to  the  character’s  carrying  capacity,  he  or  she  may  
be carrying a light, medium, or heavy load. Like armor, a character’s 
load  affects  his  or  her  maximum  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC,  carries  a  
check  penalty  (which  works  like  an  armor  check  penalty),  reduces  
the character’s speed, and affects how fast the character can run, as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown  on  Table  9–2:  Carrying  Loads.  A  medium  or  heavy  load  
counts  as  medium  or  heavy  armor  for  the  purpose  of  abilities  or  
skills that are restricted by armor. Carrying a light load does not 
encumber a character. 
If your character is wearing armor, use the worse figure (from 
armor   or   from   load)   for   each   category.   Do   not   stack   the   
penalties. 
For  example,  Tordek  is  wearing  scale  mail.  As  shown  on  
Table  7–6:  Armor  and  Shields,  this  armor  cuts  his  maximum  
Dex  bonus  to  AC  to  +3,  and  gives  him  a  –4  armor  check  
penalty (and cuts his speed to 15 feet, were he not a dwarf and 
thus able to move normally even when encumbered by armor 
or a load). The total weight of his gear, including armor, is 71-
1/2 pounds. Since Tordek has a Strength of 15, his maximum 
carrying   capacity,   or   maximum   load,   is   200   pounds.   A   
medium load for him is 67 pounds or more, and a heavy load 
is  134  pounds  or  more,  so  he  is  carrying  a  medium  load.  
Looking  at  the  medium  load  line  on  Table  9–2:  Carrying  
Loads,  his  player  sees  that  these  figures  are  all  equal  to  or  
less than the penalties that Tordek is already incurring for 
wearing scale mail, so he incurs no extra penalties. 
Mialee   has   a   Strength   of   10,   and   she’s   carrying   28   
pounds of gear. Her light load limit is 33 pounds, so she’s 
carrying  a  light  load  (no  penalties).  She  finds  500  gold  
pieces (weighing 10 pounds) and adds them to her load, so 
now  she’s  carrying  a  medium  load.  Doing  so  reduces  her  
speed  from  30  feet  to  20  feet,  gives  her  a  –3  check  penalty,  
and sets her maximum Dexterity bonus to AC at +3 (which 
is   okay   with   her,   since   that’s   her   Dexterity   bonus   
anyway). 
161

 
 
162 
Table 9–1: Carrying Capacity 
  Strength Score Light Load Medium Load Heavy Load 
 1 3 lb. or less 4–6 lb. 7–10 lb. 
 2 6 lb. or less 7–13 lb. 14–20 lb. 
 3 10 lb. or less 11–20 lb. 21–30 lb. 
 4 13 lb. or less 14–26 lb. 27–40 lb. 
 5 16 lb. or less 17–33 lb. 34–50 lb. 
 6 20 lb. or less 21–40 lb. 41–60 lb. 
 7 23 lb. or less 24–46 lb. 47–70 lb. 
 8 26 lb. or less 27–53 lb. 54–80 lb. 
 9 30 lb. or less 31–60 lb. 61–90 lb. 
 10 33 lb. or less 34–66 lb. 67–100 lb. 
 11 38 lb. or less 39–76 lb. 77–115 lb. 
 12 43 lb. or less 44–86 lb. 87–130 lb. 
 13 50 lb. or less 51–100 lb. 101–150 lb. 
 14 58 lb. or less 59–116 lb. 117–175 lb. 
 15 66 lb. or less 67–133 lb. 134–200 lb. 
 16 76 lb. or less 77–153 lb. 154–230 lb. 
 17 86 lb. or less 87–173 lb. 174–260 lb. 
 18 100 lb. or less 101–200 lb. 201–300 lb. 
 19 116 lb. or less 117–233 lb. 234–350 lb. 
 20 133 lb. or less 134–266 lb. 267–400 lb. 
 21 153 lb. or less 154–306 lb. 307–460 lb. 
 22 173 lb. or less 174–346 lb. 347–520 lb. 
 23 200 lb. or less 201–400 lb. 401–600 lb. 
 24 233 lb. or less 234–466 lb. 467–700 lb. 
 25 266 lb. or less 267–533 lb. 534–800 lb. 
 26 306 lb. or less 307–613 lb. 614–920 lb. 
 27 346 lb. or less 347–693 lb. 694–1,040 lb. 
 28 400 lb. or less 401–800 lb. 801–1,200 lb. 
 29 466 lb. or less 467–933 lb. 934–1,400 lb. 
          +10          ×4          ×4          ×4
 
 
Then Mialee is knocked unconscious in a fight, and Tordek wants 
to  carry  her  out  of  the  dungeon.  She  weighs  104  pounds,  and  her  
gear weighs 28 pounds (or 38 pounds with the gold), so Tordek can’t 
quite manage to carry her and her gear, because doing so would put 
him    over    his    200-pound    maximum    load.    Fortunately,    their    
companion Jozan is able to carry her gear and the gold, so all Tordek 
has  to  worry  about  is  Mialee  herself.  Tordek  hoists  Mialee  onto  his  
shoulders,  and  now  the  dwarf  is  carrying  175-1/2  pounds.  He  can  
manage  it,  but  it’s  a  heavy  load.  His  maximum  Dexterity  bonus  to  
AC drops to +1, his check penalty worsens from –4 (the armor check 
penalty for scale mail) to –6 (the check penalty for a heavy load), and 
now he runs at ×3 speed instead of ×4. 
Lifting and Dragging: A character can lift as much as his or her 
maximum load over his or her head. 
A  character  can  lift  as  much  as  double  his  or  her  maximum  load  
off the ground, but he or she can only stagger around with it. While 
overloaded  in  this  way,  the  character  loses  any  Dexterity  bonus  to  
AC and can move only 5 feet per round (as a full-round action). 
A character can generally push or drag along the ground as much 
as five times his or her maximum load. Favorable conditions (such as 
being on smooth ground or dragging a slick object) can double these 
numbers,  and  bad  circumstances  (such  as  being  on  broken  ground  
or pushing an object that snags) can reduce them to one-half or less. 
Bigger  and  Smaller  Creatures:  The  figures  on  Table  9–1:  Car-
rying  Capacity  are  for  Medium  bipedal  creatures.  A  larger  bipedal  
creature  can  carry  more  weight  depending  on  its  size  category,  as  
follows:  Large  ×2,  Huge  ×4,  Gargantuan  ×8,  Colossal  ×16.  A  smaller  
creature  can  carry  less  weight  depending  on  its  size  category,  as  
follows:  Small  ×3/4,  Tiny  ×1/2,  Diminutive  ×1/4,  Fine  ×1/8.  Thus,  a  
human  with  a  Strength  score  magically  boosted  to  equal  that  of  a  
giant would still have a harder time lifting, say, a horse or a boulder 
than a giant would. 
 
 
Table 9–2: Carrying Loads 
 Max Check –—— Speed —–— 
Load Dex Penalty (30 ft.) (20 ft.) Run 
Medium +3 –3 20 ft. 15 ft. x4 
Heavy +1 –6 20 ft. 15 ft. x3
 
 
Quadrupeds,  such  as  horses,  can  carry  heavier  loads  than  char-
acters can. Instead of the multipliers given above, multiply the value 
corresponding  to  the  creature’s  Strength  score  from  Table  9–1  by  
the  appropriate  modifier,  as  follows:  Fine  ×1/4,  Diminutive  ×1/2,  
Tiny ×3/4, Small ×1, Medium ×1-1/2, Large ×3, Huge ×6, Gargantuan 
×12, Colossal ×24. 
For example, Mialee, an elf with 10 Strength, can carry as much as 
100  pounds.  Lidda,  a  halfling  with  10  Strength,  can  carry  only  75  
pounds.  A  donkey,  a  Medium  animal  with  10  Strength,  can  carry  as  
much as 150 pounds. 
Tremendous Strength: For Strength scores not shown on Table 
9–1,  find  the  Strength  score  between  20  and  29  that  has  the  same  
number  in  the  “ones”  digit  as  the  creature’s  Strength  score  does.  
Multiply the figures by 4 if the creature’s Strength is in the 30s, 16 if 
it’s  in  the  40s,  64  if  it’s  in  the  50s,  and  so  on.  For  example,  a  cloud  
giant with a 35 Strength can carry four times what a creature with a 
25 Strength can carry, or 3,200 pounds × 4 because the cloud giant is 
Huge, for a total of 12,800 pounds. 
 
MOVEMENT 
Characters  spend  a  lot  of  time  getting  from  one  place  to  another.  A  
character  who  needs  to  reach  the  evil  tower  might  choose  to  walk  
along  the  road,  hire  a  boat  to  row  him  along  the  river,  or  cut  cross-
country on horseback. In addition, a character can climb trees to get 
a better look at his surroundings, scale mountains, or ford streams. 
The  DM  moderates  the  pace  of  a  game  session,  so  he  or  she  
determines  when  movement  is  so  important  that  it’s  worth  meas-
uring.  During  casual  scenes,  you  usually  won’t  have  to  worry  about  
movement rates. If your character has come to a new city and takes a 
stroll  to  get  a  feel  for  the  place,  no  one  needs  to  know  exactly  how  
many rounds or minutes the circuit takes. 
There are three movement scales in the game, as follows. 
 Tactical, for combat, measured in feet (or squares) per round. 
 
Table 9–3: Movement and Distance 
 ——————— Speed ——–———— 
 15 feet 20 feet 30 feet 40 feet 
One Round (Tactical)
1
 
Walk 15 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft. 
Hustle 30 ft. 40 ft. 60 ft. 80 ft. 
Run (×3) 45 ft. 60 ft. 90 ft. 120 ft. 
Run (×4) 60 ft. 80 ft. 120 ft. 160 ft. 
One Minute (Local) 
Walk 150 ft. 200 ft. 300 ft. 400 ft. 
Hustle 300 ft. 400 ft. 600 ft. 800 ft. 
Run (×3) 450 ft. 600 ft. 900 ft. 1,200 ft. 
Run (×4) 600 ft. 800 ft. 1,200 ft.     1,600 ft. 
One Hour (Overland) 
Walk 1-1/2 miles   2 miles 3 miles 4 miles 
Hustle 3 miles 4 miles 6 miles 8 miles 
Run              —              —              —              —              
One Day (Overland) 
Walk 12 miles    16 miles    24 miles    32 miles 
Hustle              —              —              —              —              
Run              —              —              —              —              
1 Tactical movement is often measured in squares on the battle grid (1 
square = 5 feet) rather than feet. See page 147 for more information 
on tactical movement in combat.
 
 