CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
171
fireball  (that  is,  a  fireball  that  has  been  enhanced  by  the  metamagic  
feat Maximize Spell) and vice versa. 
Specific   Exceptions:   Some   spells   specifically   counter   each   
other,  especially  when  they  have  diametrically  opposed  effects.  For  
example,  you  can  counter  a  haste  spell  with  a  slow  spell  as  well  as  
with another haste spell, or you can counter reduce person with enlarge 
person. 
Dispel   Magic   as   a   Counterspell:   You   can   use   dispel   magic   to   
counterspell  another  spellcaster,  and  you  don’t  need  to  identify  the  
spell  he  or  she  is  casting.  However,  dispel magic doesn’t always work 
as a counterspell (see the spell description, page 223). 
 
CASTER LEVEL 
A  spell’s  power  often  depends  on  its  caster  level,  which  for  most  
spellcasting characters is equal to your class level in the class you’re 
using  to  cast  the  spell.  For  example,  a  fireball  deals  1d6  points  of  
damage  per  caster  level  (to  a  maximum  of  10d6),  so  a  10th-level  
wizard can cast a more powerful fireball than a 5th-level wizard can. 
You  can  cast  a  spell  at  a  lower  caster  level  than  normal,  but  the  
caster level you choose must be high enough for you to cast the spell 
in  question,  and  all  level-dependent  features  must  be  based  on  the  
same caster level. For example, at 10th level, Mialee can cast a fireball 
to  a  range  of  800  feet  for  10d6  points  of  damage.  If  she  wishes,  she  
can cast a fireball that deals less damage by casting the spell at a lower 
caster level, but she must reduce the range according to the selected 
caster  level,  and  she  can’t  cast  fireball  with  a  caster  level  lower  than  
5th (the minimum level required for a wizard to cast fireball). 
In  the  event  that  a  class  feature,  domain  granted  power,  or  other  
special  ability  provides  an  adjustment  to  your  caster  level,  that  
adjustment  applies  not  only  to  effects  based  on  caster  level  (such  as  
range,  duration,  and  damage  dealt)  but  also  to  your  caster  level  
check  to  overcome  your  target’s  spell  resistance  (see  Spell  Resis-
tance,  page  177)  and  to  the  caster  level  used  in  dispel  checks  (both  
the  dispel  check  and  the  DC  of  the  check).  For  instance,  a  7th-level  
cleric with the Good domain casts spells with the good descriptor as 
if he were 8th level. This means that his holy smite deals 4d8 points of 
damage,  he  tolls  1d20+8  to  overcome  spell  resistance  with  his  good  
spells,  and  his  protection  from  evil  spell  resists  being  dispelled  as  if  it  
had been cast by an 8th-level spellcaster. 
 
SPELL FAILURE 
If you ever try to cast a spell in conditions where the characteristics 
of the spell (range, area, or the like) cannot be made to conform, the 
casting  fails  and  the  spell  is  wasted.  For  example,  if  you  cast  charm 
person  on  a  dog,  the  spell  fails  because  a  dog  is  the  wrong  sort  of  
target for the spell. 
Spells  also  fail  if  your  concentration  is  broken  and  might  fail  if  
you’re wearing armor while casting a spell with somatic components 
(see Table 7–6: Armor and Shields, page 123). 
 
THE SPELL’S RESULT 
Once  you  know  which  creatures  (or  objects  or  areas)  are  affected,  
and whether those creatures have made successful saving throws (if 
any were allowed), you can apply whatever results a spell entails. 
Many spells affect particular sorts of creatures. Repel vermin keeps 
vermin away, and calm animals can calm down animals and magical 
beasts.  These  terms,  and  terms  like  them,  refer  to  specific  creature  
types defined in the Monster Manual. 
 
SPECIAL SPELL EFFECTS 
Many special spell effects are handled according to the school of the 
spells  in  question.  For  example,  illusory  figments  all  have  certain  
effects  in  common  (see  Illusion,  page  173).  Certain  other  special  
spell features are found across spell schools. 
Attacks:  Some  spell  descriptions  refer  to  attacking.  For  instance,  
invisibility is dispelled if you attack anyone or anything while under 
its   effects.   All   offensive   combat   actions,   even   those   that   don’t   
damage  opponents  (such  as  disarm  and  bull  rush)  are  considered  
attacks.  Attempts  to  turn  or  rebuke  undead  count  as  attacks.  All  
spells that opponents resist with saving throws, that deal damage, or 
that otherwise harm or hamper subjects are attacks. Summon monster 
I  and  similar  spells  are  not  attacks  because  the  spells  themselves  
don’t harm anyone. 
Bonus  Types:  Many  spells  give  their  subjects  bonuses  to  ability  
scores,  Armor  Class,  attacks,  and  other  attributes.  Usually,  a  bonus  
has   a   type   that   indicates   how   the   spell   grants   the   bonus.   For   
example, mage  armor  grants  an  armor  bonus  to  AC,  indicating  that  
the  spell  creates  a  tangible  barrier  around  you.  Shield of faith,  on  the  
other  hand,  grants  a  deflection  bonus  to  AC,  which  makes  attacks  
veer  off.  (Bonus  types  are  covered  in  detail  in  the  Dungeon  Master’s  
Guide.)  The  important  aspect  of  bonus  types  is  that  two  bonuses  of  
the  same  type  don’t  generally  stack.  With  the  exception  of  dodge  
bonuses,  most  circumstance  bonuses,  and  racial  bonuses,  only  the  
better  bonus  works  (see  Combining  Magical  Effects,  below).  The  
same principle applies to penalties—a character taking two or more 
penalties of the same type applies only the worst one. 
Bringing   Back   the   Dead:   Several   spells   have   the   power   to   
restore slain characters to life. 
When  a  living  creature  dies,  its  soul  departs  its  body,  leaves  the  
Material  Plane,  travels  through  the  Astral  Plane,  and  goes  to  abide  
on  the  plane  where  the  creature’s  deity  resides.  If  the  creature  did  
not worship a deity, its soul departs to the plane corresponding to its 
alignment.  Bringing  someone  back  from  the  dead  means  retrieving  
his or her soul and returning it to his or her body. 
Level  Loss:  The  passage  from  life  to  death  and  back  again  is  a  
wrenching  journey  for  a  being’s  soul.  Consequently,  any  creature  
brought  back  to  life  usually  loses  one  level  of  experience.  The  
character’s  new  XP  total  is  midway  between  the  minimum  needed  
for his or her new (reduced) level and the minimum needed for the 
next one. If the character was 1st level at the time of death, he or she 
loses 2 points of Constitution instead of losing a level. 
This  level  loss  or  Constitution  loss  cannot  be  repaired  by  any  
mortal  means,  even  wish or miracle. A revived character can regain a 
lost  level  by  earning  XP  through  further  adventuring.  A  revived  
character  who  was  1st  level  at  the  time  of  death  can  regain  lost  
points  of  Constitution  by  improving  his  or  her  Constitution  score  
when he or she attains a level that allows an ability score increase. 
Preventing  Revivification:  Enemies  can  take  steps  to  make  it  more  
difficult  for  a  character  to  be  returned  from  the  dead.  Keeping  the  
body  prevents  others  from  using  raise  dead  or  resurrection  to  restore  
the  slain  character  to  life.  Casting  trap  the  soul  prevents  any  sort  of  
revivification unless the soul is first released. 
Revivification against One’s Will: A soul cannot be returned to life if 
it  does  not  wish  to  be.  A  soul  knows  the  name,  alignment,  and  
patron deity (if any) of the character attempting to revive it and may 
refuse to return on that basis. For example, if Alhandra the paladin is 
slain  and  a  high  priest  of  Nerull  (god  of  death)  grabs  her  body,  
Alhandra probably does not wish to be raised from the dead by him. 
Any  attempts  he  makes  to  revive  her  automatically  fail.  If  the  evil  
cleric  wants  to  revive  Alhandra  to  interrogate  her,  he  needs  to  find  
some way to trick her soul, such as duping a good cleric into raising 
her and then capturing her once she’s alive again. 
 
COMBINING MAGICAL EFFECTS 
Spells  or  magical  effects  usually  work  as  described,  no  matter  how  
many  other  spells  or  magical  effects  happen  to  be  operating  in  the  
same  area  or  on  the  same  recipient.  Except  in  special  cases,  a  spell  
does not affect the way another spell operates. Whenever a spell has 
a  specific  effect  on  other  spells,  the  spell  description  explains  that  
effect.  Several  other  general  rules  apply  when  spells  or  magical  
effects operate in the same place: 
Stacking  Effects:  Spells  that  provide  bonuses  or  penalties  on  
attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and other attributes usually 
do not stack with themselves. For example, two bless spells don’t give 
twice the benefit of one bless. Both bless spells, however, continue to 
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
172 
act simultaneously, and if one ends first, the other one continues to 
operate  for  the  remainder  of  its  duration.  Likewise,  two  haste  spells  
do not make the creature doubly fast. 
More  generally,  two  bonuses  of  the  same  type  don’t  stack  even  if  
they  come  from  different  spells  (or  from  effects  other  than  spells;  
see  Bonus  Types,  above).  For  example,  the  enhancement  bonus  to  
Strength  from  a  bull’s  strength  spell  and  the  enhancement  bonus  to  
Strength  from  a  divine  power  spell  don’t  stack.  You  use  whichever  
bonus  gives  you  the  better  Strength  score.  In  the  same  way,  a  belt of 
giant  Strength  gives  you  an  enhancement  bonus  to  Strength,  which  
does not stack with the bonus you get from a bull’s strength spell. 
Different  Bonus  Names:  The  bonuses  or  penalties  from  two  dif-
ferent   spells   stack   if   the   modifiers   are   of   different   types.   For   
example, bless  provides  a  +1  morale  bonus  on  saves  against  fear  
effects,  and  protection  from  evil  provides  a  +2  resistance  bonus  on  
saves  against  spells  cast  by  evil  creatures.  A  character  under  the  
influence of spells gets a +1 bonus against all fear effects, a +2 bonus 
against  spells  cast  by  evil  beings,  and  a  +3  bonus  against  fear  spells  
cast by evil creatures. 
A  bonus  that  isn’t  named  (just  a  “+2  bonus”  rather  than  a  “+2  
resistance bonus”) stacks with any bonus. 
Same Effect More than Once in Different Strengths: In cases when two 
or  more  identical  spells  are  operating  in  the  same  area  or  on  the  
same target, but at different strengths, only the best one applies. For 
example,  if  a  character  takes  a  –4  penalty  to  Strength  from  a  ray  of  
enfeeblement  spell  and  then  receives  a  second  ray of enfeeblement spell 
that  applies  a  –6  penalty,  he  or  she  takes  only  the  –6  penalty.  Both  
spells  are  still  operating  on  the  character,  however.  If  one  ray  of  
enfeeblement spell is dispelled or its duration runs out, the other spell 
remains in effect, assuming that its duration has not yet expired. 
Same  Effect  with  Differing  Results:  The  same  spell  can  sometimes  
produce  varying  effects  if  applied  to  the  same  recipient  more  than  
once. For example, a series of polymorph spells might turn a creature 
into a mouse, a lion, and then a snail. In this case, the last spell in the 
series  trumps  the  others.  None  of  the  previous  spells  are  actually  
removed  or  dispelled,  but  their  effects  become  irrelevant  while  the  
final spell in the series lasts. 
One   Effect   Makes   Another   Irrelevant:   Sometimes,   one   spell   can   
render  a  later  spell  irrelevant.  For  example,  if  a  wizard  is  using  a  
shapechange  spell  to  take  the  shape  of  an  eagle,  a  polymorph  spell  
could   change   her   into   a   goldfish.   The   shapechange   spell   is   not   
negated, however, and since the polymorph spell has no effect on the 
recipient’s  special  abilities,  the  wizard  could  use  the  shapechange 
effect  to  take  any  form  the  spell  allows  whenever  she  desires.  If  a  
creature  using  a  shapechange  effect  becomes  petrified  by  a  flesh  to  
stone  spell,  however,  it  turns  into  a  mindless,  inert  statue,  and  the  
shapechange effect cannot help it escape. 
Multiple   Mental   Control   Effects:  Sometimes  magical  effects  that  
establish mental control render each other irrelevant. For example, a 
hold person effect renders any other form of mental control irrelevant 
because  it  robs  the  subject  of  the  ability  to  move.  Mental  controls  
that   don’t   remove   the   recipient’s   ability   to   act   usually   do   not   
interfere with each other. For example, a person who has received a 
geas/quest  spell  can  also  be  subjected  to  a  charm  person  spell.  The  
charmed  person  remains  committed  to  fulfilling  the  quest,  however,  
and  resists  any  order  that  interferes  with  that  goal.  In  this  case,  the  
geas/quest  spell  doesn’t  negate  charm  person,  but  it  does  reduce  its  
effectiveness,  just  as  nonmagical  devotion  to  a  quest  would.  If  a  
creature  is  under  the  mental  control  of  two  or  more  creatures,  it  
tends  to  obey  each  to  the  best  of  its  ability,  and  to  the  extent  of  the  
control   each   effect   allows.   If   the   controlled   creature   receives   
conflicting  orders  simultaneously,  the  competing  controllers  must  
make   opposed   Charisma   checks   to   determine   which   one   the   
creature obeys. 
Spells with Opposite Effects: Spells with opposite effects apply 
normally,  with  all  bonuses,  penalties,  or  changes  accruing  in  the  
order that they apply. Some spells negate or counter each other. This 
is a special effect that is noted in a spell’s description. 
Instantaneous  Effects:  Two  or  more  spells  with  instantaneous  
durations  work  cumulatively  when  they  affect  the  same  target.  For  
example,  when  two  fireballs  strike  a  same  creature,  the  target  must  
attempt  a  saving  throw  against  each  fireball  and  takes  damage  from  
each  according  to  the  saving  throws’  results.  If  a  creature  receives  
two cure light wounds spells in a single round, both work normally. 
 
SPELL DESCRIPTIONS 
The spells available to characters are listed and described in Chapter 
11:  Spells.  The  description  of  each  spell  is  presented  in  a  standard  
format.   Each   category   of   information   is   explained   and   defined   
below. 
 
NAME 
The first line of every spell description gives the name by which the 
spell is generally known. 
 
SCHOOL (SUBSCHOOL) 
Beneath the spell name is a line giving the school of magic (and the 
subschool, if appropriate) that the spell belongs to. 
Almost  every  spell  belongs  to  one  of  eight  schools  of  magic.  A  
school of magic is a group of related spells that work in similar ways. 
A small number of spells (arcane mark, limited wish, permanency, pres-
tidigitation, and wish) are universal, belonging to no school. 
 
Abjuration 
Abjurations  are  protective  spells.  They  create  physical  or  magical  
barriers,  negate  magical  or  physical  abilities,  harm  trespassers,  or  
even  banish  the  subject  of  the  spell  to  another  plane  of  existence.  
Representative   spells   include   protection   from   evil, dispel   magic, 
antimagic field, and banishment. 
If  one  abjuration  spell  is  active  within  10  feet  of  another  for  24  
hours  or  more,  the  magical  fields  interfere  with  each  other  and  
create barely visible energy fluctuations. The DC to find such spells 
with the Search skill drops by 4. 
If  an  abjuration  creates  a  barrier  that  keeps  certain  types  of  
creatures  at  bay,  that  barrier  cannot  be  used  to  push  away  those  
creatures.  If  you  force  the  barrier  against  such  a  creature,  you  feel  a  
discernible  pressure  against  the  barrier.  If  you  continue  to  apply  
pressure, you end the spell. 
 
Conjuration 
Each  conjuration  spell  belongs  to  one  of  five  subschools.  Con-
jurations bring manifestations of objects, creatures, or some form of 
energy   to   you   (the   summoning   subschool),   actually   transport   
creatures  from  another  plane  of  existence  to  your  plane  (calling),  
heal  (healing),  transport  creatures  or  objects  over  great  distances  
(teleportation),  or  create  objects  or  effects  on  the  spot  (creation).  
Creatures you conjure usually, but not always, obey your commands. 
Representative spells include the various summon monster spells, cure 
light wounds, raise dead, teleport, and wall of iron. 
A  creature  or  object  brought  into  being  or  transported  to  your  
location by a conjuration spell cannot appear inside another creature 
or object, nor can it appear floating in an empty space. It must arrive 
in  an  open  location  on  a  surface  capable  of  supporting  it.  The  
creature  or  object  must  appear  within  the  spell’s  range,  but  it  does  
not have to remain within the range. 
Calling:  A  calling  spell  transports  a  creature  from  another  plane  
to  the  plane  you  are  on.  The  spell  grants  the  creature  the  one-time  
ability  to  return  to  its  plane  of  origin,  although  the  spell  may  limit  
the  circumstances  under  which  this  is  possible.  Creatures  who  are  
called  actually  die  when  they  are  killed;  they  do  not  disappear  and  
reform,  as  do  those  brought  by  a  summoning  spell  (see  below).  The  
duration  of  a  calling  spell  is  instantaneous,  which  means  that  the  
called creature can’t be dispelled. 
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
173
Creation: A creation spell manipulates matter to create an object 
or  creature  in  the  place  the  spellcaster  designates  (subject  to  the  
limits   noted   above).   If   the   spell   has   a   duration   other   than   
instantaneous,  magic  holds  the  creation  together,  and  when  the  
spell  ends,  the  conjured  creature  or  object  vanishes  without  a  trace.  
If  the  spell  has  an  instantaneous  duration,  the  created  object  or  
creature is merely assembled through magic. It lasts indefinitely and 
does not depend on magic for its existence. 
Healing:   Certain   divine   conjurations   heal   creatures   or   even   
bring them back to life. These include cure spells. 
Summoning:  A  summoning  spell  instantly  brings  a  creature  or  
object to a place you designate. When the spell ends or is dispelled, a 
summoned creature is instantly sent back to where it came from, but 
a  summoned  object  is  not  sent  back  unless  the  spell  description  
specifically indicates this. A summoned creature also goes away if it 
is killed or if its hit points drop to 0 or lower. It is not really dead. It 
takes 24 hours for the creature to reform, during which time it can’t 
be summoned again. 
When  the  spell  that  summoned  a  creature  ends  and  the  creature  
disappears,  all  the  spells  it  has  cast  expire.  A  summoned  creature  
cannot  use  any  innate  summoning  abilities  it  may  have,  and  it  
refuses  to  cast  any  spells  that  would  cost  it  XP,  or  to  use  any  spell-
like abilities that would cost XP if they were spells. 
Teleportation:   A   teleportation   spell   transports   one   or   more   
creatures  or  objects  a  great  distance.  The  most  powerful  of  these  
spells  can  cross  planar  boundaries.  Unlike  summoning  spells,  the  
transportation  is  (unless  otherwise  noted)  one-way  and  not  dis-
pellable.  Teleportation  is  instantaneous  travel  through  the  Astral  
Plane. Anything that blocks astral travel also blocks teleportation. 
 
Divination 
Divination  spells  enable  you  to  learn  secrets  long  forgotten,  to  
predict the future, to find hidden things, and to foil deceptive spells. 
Representative    spells    include    identify, detect    thoughts, clairau-
dience/clairvoyance, and true seeing. 
Many  divination  spells  have  cone-shaped  areas  (see  page  175).  
These  move  with  you  and  extend  in  the  direction  you  look.  The  
cone  defines  the  area  that  you  can  sweep  each  round.  If  you  study  
the  same  area  for  multiple  rounds,  you  can  often  gain  additional  
information, as noted in the descriptive text for the spell. 
Scrying:  A  scrying  spell  creates  an  invisible  magical  sensor  that  
sends  you  information.  Unless  noted  otherwise,  the  sensor  has  the  
same  powers  of  sensory  acuity  that  you  possess.  This  level  of  acuity  
includes any spells or effects that target you (such as darkvision or see 
invisibility),  but  not  spells  or  effects  that  emanate  from  you  (such  as  
detect evil). However, the sensor is treated as a separate, independent 
sensory  organ  of  yours,  and  thus  it  functions  normally  even  if  you  
have  been  blinded,  deafened,  or  otherwise  suffered  sensory  impair-
ment.  Any  creature  with  an  Intelligence  score  of  12  or  higher  can  
notice the sensor by making a DC 20 Intelligence check. The sensor 
can be dispelled as if it were an active spell. 
Lead  sheeting  or  magical  protection  (such  as  antimagic  field, mind 
blank,  or  nondetection)  blocks  a  scrying  spell,  and  you  sense  that  the  
spell is so blocked. 
 
Enchantment 
Enchantment   spells   affect   the   minds   of   others,   influencing   or   
controlling   their   behavior.   Representative   spells   include   charm 
person and suggestion. 
All    enchantments    are    mind-affecting    spells.    Two    types    of    
enchantment spells grant you influence over a subject creature. 
Charm:  A  charm  spell  changes  how  the  subject  views  you,  typ-
ically making it see you as a good friend. 
Compulsion:  A  compulsion  spell  forces  the  subject  to  act  in  
some  manner  or  changes  the  way  her  mind  works.  Some  compul-
sion  spells  determine  the  subject’s  actions  or  the  effects  on  the  
subject, some compulsion spells allow you to determine the subject’s 
actions when you cast the spell, and others give you ongoing control 
over the subject. 
 
Evocation 
Evocation  spells  manipulate  energy  or  tap  an  unseen  source  of  
power to produce a desired end. In effect, they create something out 
of  nothing.  Many  of  these  spells  produce  spectacular  effects,  and  
evocation  spells  can  deal  large  amounts  of  damage.  Representative  
spells include magic missile, fireball, and lightning bolt. 
 
Illusion 
Illusion  spells  deceive  the  senses  or  minds  of  others.  They  cause  
people to see things that are not there, not see things that are there, 
hear  phantom  noises,  or  remember  things  that  never  happened.  
Representative  illusions  include  silent  image, invisibility,  and  veil. 
Illusions come in five types: figments, glamers, patterns, phantasms, 
and shadows. 
Figment:  A  figment  spell  creates  a  false  sensation.  Those  who  
perceive the figment perceive the same thing, not their own slightly 
different  versions  of  the  figment.  (It  is  not  a  personalized  mental  
impression.)    Figments    cannot    make    something    seem    to    be    
something   else.   A   figment   that   includes   audible   effects   cannot   
duplicate intelligible speech unless the spell description specifically 
says it can. If intelligible speech is possible, it must be in a language 
you  can  speak.  If  you  try  to  duplicate  a  language  you  cannot  speak,  
the  image  produces  gibberish.  Likewise,  you  cannot  make  a  visual  
copy of something unless you know what it looks like. 
Because figments and glamers (see below) are unreal, they cannot 
produce  real  effects  the  way  that  other  types  of  illusions  can.  They  
cannot cause damage to objects or creatures, support weight, provide 
nutrition,  or  provide  protection  from  the  elements.  Consequently,  
these  spells  are  useful  for  confounding  or  delaying  foes,  but  useless  
for attacking them directly. For example, it is possible to use a silent 
image  spell  to  create  an  illusory  cottage,  but  the  cottage  offers  no  
protection from rain. 
A figment’s AC is equal to 10 + its size modifier. 
Glamer:  A  glamer  spell  changes  a  subject’s  sensory  qualities,  
making  it  look,  feel,  taste,  smell,  or  sound  like  something  else,  or  
even seem to disappear. 
Pattern:  Like  a  figment,  a  pattern  spell  creates  an  image  that  
others can see, but a pattern also affects the minds of those who see 
it or are caught in it. All patterns are mind-affecting spells. 
Phantasm: A phantasm spell creates a mental image that usually 
only the caster and the subject (or subjects) of the spell can perceive. 
This  impression  is  totally  in  the  minds  of  the  subjects.  It  is  a  
personalized mental impression. (It’s all in their heads and not a fake 
picture or something that they actually see.) Third parties viewing or 
studying  the  scene  don’t  notice  the  phantasm.  All  phantasms  are  
mind-affecting spells. 
Shadow:  A  shadow  spell  creates  something  that  is  partially  real  
from  extradimensional  energy.  Such  illusions  can  have  real  effects.  
Damage dealt by a shadow illusion is real. 
Saving  Throws  and  Illusions  (Disbelief):  Creatures  encoun-
tering  an  illusion  usually  do  not  receive  saving  throws  to  recognize  
it  as  illusory  until  they  study  it  carefully  or  interact  with  it  in  some  
fashion. For example, if a party encounters a section of illusory floor, 
the character in the lead would receive a saving throw if she stopped 
and studied the floor or if she probed the floor. 
A successful saving throw against an illusion reveals it to be false, 
but  a  figment  or  phantasm  remains  as  a  translucent  outline.  For  
examples,  a  character  making  a  successful  saving  throw  against  a  
figment  of  an  illusory  section  of  floor  knows  the  “floor”  isn’t  safe  to  
walk on and can see what lies below (light permitting), but he or she 
can still note where the figment lies. 
A  failed  saving  throw  indicates  that  a  character  fails  to  notice  
something  is  amiss.  A  character  faced  with  proof  that  an  illusion  
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
174 
isn’t  real  needs  no  saving  throw.  A  character  who  falls  through  a  
section of illusory floor into a pit knows something is amiss, as does 
one  who  spends  a  few  rounds  poking  at  the  same  illusion.  If  any  
viewer  successfully  disbelieves  an  illusion  and  communicates  this  
fact  to  others,  each  such  viewer  gains  a  saving  throw  with  a  +4  
bonus. 
 
Necromancy 
Necromancy  spells  manipulate  the  power  of  death,  unlife,  and  the  
life  force.  Spells  involving  undead  creatures  make  up  a  large  part  of  
this school. Representative spells include cause fear, animate dead, and 
finger of death. 
 
Transmutation 
Transmutation spells change the properties of some creature, thing, 
or   condition.   Representative   spells   include   enlarge   person, reduce 
person, polymorph, and shapechange. 
 
[DESCRIPTOR] 
Appearing  on  the  same  line  as  the  school  and  subschool,  when  
applicable,  is  a  descriptor  that  further  categorizes  the  spell  in  some  
way. Some spells have more than one descriptor. 
The  descriptors  are  acid,  air,  chaotic,  cold,  darkness,  death,  earth,  
electricity,  evil,  fear,  fire,  force,  good,  language-dependent,  lawful,  
light, mind-affecting, sonic, and water. 
Most of these descriptors have no game effect by themselves, but 
they  govern  how  the  spell  interacts  with  other  spells,  with  special  
abilities, with unusual creatures, with alignment, and so on. 
A   language-dependent   spell   uses   intelligible   language   as   a   
medium  for  communication.  For  instance,  a  cleric’s  command  spell  
fails   if   the   target   can’t   understand   what   the   cleric   says,   either   
because it doesn’t understand the language he is speaking or because 
background noise prevents it from hearing what the cleric says. 
A   mind-affecting   spell   works   only   against   creatures   with   an   
Intelligence score of 1 or higher. 
 
LEVEL 
The  next  line  of  a  spell  description  gives  the  spell’s  level,  a  number  
between 0 and 9 that defines the spell’s relative power. This number 
is preceded by an abbreviation for the class whose members can cast 
the  spell.  The  Level  entry  also  indicates  whether  a  spell  is  a  domain  
spell and, if so, what its domain and its level as a domain spell are. A 
spell’s level affects the DC for any save allowed against the effect. 
For  example,  the  Level  entry  for  hold  person is “Brd 2, Clr 2, 
Sor/Wiz  3.”  That  means  it  is  a  2nd-level  spell  for  bards,  a  2nd-level  
spell  for  clerics,  and  a  3rd-level  spell  for  sorcerers  and  wizards.  The  
level  entry  for  magic  vestment  is  “Clr  3,  Strength  3,  War  3.”  That  
means it is a 3rd-level spell for clerics, the 3rd-level Strength domain 
spell, and the 3rd-level War domain spell. 
Names of spellcasting classes are abbreviated as follows: bard Brd; 
cleric  Clr;  druid  Drd;  paladin  Pal;  ranger  Rgr;  sorcerer  Sor;  wizard  
Wiz. 
The  domains  a  spell  can  be  associated  with  include  Air,  Animal,  
Chaos,    Death,    Destruction,    Earth,    Evil,    Fire,    Good,    Healing,    
Knowledge,  Law,  Luck,  Magic,  Plant,  Protection,  Strength,  Sun,  
Travel, Trickery, War, and Water. 
 
COMPONENTS 
A spell’s components are what you must do or possess to cast it. The 
Components entry in a spell description includes abbreviations that 
tell you what type of components it has. Specifics for material, focus, 
and  XP  components  are  given  at  the  end  of  the  descriptive  text.  
Usually you don’t worry about components, but when you can’t use 
a  component  for  some  reason  or  when  a  material  or  focus  com-
ponent is expensive, then the components are important. 
Verbal  (V):  A  verbal  component  is  a  spoken  incantation.  To  pro-
vide a verbal component, you must be able to speak in a strong voice. 
A silence  spell  or  a  gag  spoils  the  incantation  (and  thus  the  spell).  A  
spellcaster  who  has  been  deafened  has  a  20%  chance  to  spoil  any  
spell with a verbal component that he or she tries to cast. 
Somatic  (S):  A  somatic  component  is  a  measured  and  precise  
movement  of  the  hand.  You  must  have  at  least  one  hand  free  to  
provide a somatic component. 
Material  (M):  A  material  component  is  one  or  more  physical  
substances or objects that are annihilated by the spell energies in the 
casting process. Unless a cost is given for a material component, the 
cost is negligible. Don’t bother to keep track of material components 
with  negligible  cost.  Assume  you  have  all  you  need  as  long  as  you  
have your spell component pouch. 
Focus  (F):  A  focus  component  is  a  prop  of  some  sort.  Unlike  a  
material component, a focus is not consumed when the spell is cast 
and can be reused. As with material components, the cost for a focus 
is  negligible  unless  a  price  is  given.  Assume  that  focus  components  
of negligible cost are in your spell component pouch. 
Divine  Focus  (DF):  A  divine  focus  component  is  an  item  of  
spiritual  significance.  The  divine  focus  for  a  cleric  or  a  paladin  is  a  
holy  symbol  appropriate  to  the  character’s  faith.  For  an  evil  cleric,  
the divine focus is an unholy symbol. The default divine focus for a 
druid or a ranger is a sprig of mistletoe or holly. 
If  the  Components  line  includes  F/DF  or  M/DF,  the  arcane  ver-
sion  of  the  spell  has  a  focus  component  or  a  material  component  
(the  abbreviation  before  the  slash)  and  the  divine  version  has  a  
divine focus component (the abbreviation after the slash). 
XP Cost (XP): Some powerful spells (such as wish, commune, and 
miracle)  entail  an  experience  point  cost  to  you.  No  spell,  not  even  
restoration, can restore the XP lost in this manner. You cannot spend 
so much XP that you lose a level, so you cannot cast the spell unless 
you   have   enough   XP   to   spare.   However,   you   may,   on   gaining   
enough  XP  to  attain  a  new  level,  use  those  XP  for  casting  a  spell  
rather than keeping them and advancing a level. The XP are treated 
just  like  a  material  component—expended  when  you  cast  the  spell,  
whether or not the casting succeeds. 
 
CASTING TIME 
Most  spells  have  a  casting  time  of  1  standard  action.  Others  take  1  
round  or  more,  while  a  few  require  only  a  free  action.  Chapter  8:  
Combat describes the difference between these types of actions. 
A  spell  that  takes  1  round  to  cast  is  a  full-round  action.  It  comes  
into effect just before the beginning of your turn in the round after 
you  began  casting  the  spell.  You  then  act  normally  after  the  spell  is  
completed. 
A  spell  that  takes  1  minute  to  cast  comes  into  effect  just  before  
your  turn  1  minute  later  (and  for  each  of  those  10  rounds,  you  are  
casting a spell as a full-round action, just as noted above for 1-round 
casting   times).   These   actions   must   be   consecutive   and   unin-
terrupted, or the spell automatically fails. 
When  you  begin  a  spell  that  takes  1  round  or  longer  to  cast,  you  
must  continue  the  concentration  from  the  current  round  to  just  
before   your   turn   in   the   next   round   (at   least).   If   you   lose   
concentration before the casting is complete, you lose the spell. 
A  spell  with  a  casting  time  of  1  free  action  (such  as  feather  fall) 
doesn’t  count  against  your  normal  limit  of  one  spell  per  round.  
However,  you  may  cast  such  a  spell  only  once  per  round.  Casting  a  
spell  with  a  casting  time  of  1  free  action  doesn’t  provoke  attacks  of  
opportunity. 
You make all pertinent decisions about a spell (range, target, area, 
effect,  version,  and  so  forth)  when  the  spell  comes  into  effect.  For  
example,  when  casting  a  summon monster spell, you need not decide 
where you want the monster to appear (or indeed, what monster you 
are  summoning)  until  the  spell  comes  into  effect  in  the  round  after  
you begin casting. 
 
RANGE 
A spell’s range indicates how far from you it can reach, as defined in 
the  Range  entry  of  the  spell  description.  A  spell’s  range  is  the  
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
175
maximum distance from you that the spell’s effect can occur, as well 
as  the  maximum  distance  at  which  you  can  designate  the  spell’s  
point  of  origin.  If  any  portion  of  the  spell’s  area  would  extend  
beyond  this  range,  that  area  is  wasted.  Standard  ranges  include  the  
following. 
Personal: The spell affects only you. 
Touch:  You  must  touch  a  creature  or  object  to  affect  it.  A  touch  
spell that deals damage can score a critical hit just as a weapon can. A 
touch  spell  threatens  a  critical  hit  on  a  natural  roll  of  20  and  deals  
double  damage  on  a  successful  critical  hit.  Some  touch  spells,  such  
as teleport  and  water  walk,  allow  you  to  touch  multiple  targets.  You  
can  touch  as  many  willing  targets  as  you  can  reach  as  part  of  the  
casting,  but  all  targets  of  the  spell  must  be  touched  in  the  same  
round that you finish casting the spell. 
Close:  The  spell  reaches  as  far  as  25  feet  away  from  you.  The  
maximum  range  increases  by  5  feet  for  every  two  full  caster  levels  
(30 feet at 2nd caster level, 35 feet at 4th caster level, and so on). 
Medium:  The  spell  reaches  as  far  as  100  feet  +  10  feet  per  caster  
level. 
Long: The spell reaches as far as 400 feet + 40 feet per caster level. 
Unlimited:  The  spell  reaches  anywhere  on  the  same  plane  of  
existence. 
Range  Expressed  in  Feet:  Some  spells  have  no  standard  range  
category, just a range expressed in feet. 
 
AIMING A SPELL 
You  must  make  some  choice  about  whom  the  spell  is  to  affect  or  
where the effect is to originate, depending on the type of spell. The 
next entry in a spell description defines the spell’s target (or targets), 
its effect, or its area, as appropriate. 
Target or Targets: Some spells, such as charm person, have a target 
or targets. You cast these spells on creatures or objects, as defined by 
the  spell  itself.  You  must  be  able  to  see  or  touch  the  target,  and  you  
must  specifically  choose  that  target.  For  example,  you  can’t  fire  a  
magic  missile  spell  (which  always  hits  its  target)  into  a  group  of  
bandits  with  the  instruction  to  strike  “the  leader.”  To  strike  the  
leader,  you  must  be  able  to  identify  and  see  the  leader  (or  guess  
which  is  the  leader  and  get  lucky).  However,  you  do  not  have  to  
select your target until you finish casting the spell. 
If  the  target  of  a  spell  is  yourself  (the  spell  description  has  a  line  
that reads Target: You), you do not receive a saving throw, and spell 
resistance  does  not  apply.  The  Saving  Throw  and  Spell  Resistance  
lines are omitted from such spells. 
Some spells restrict you to willing targets only. Declaring yourself 
as a willing target is something that can be done at any time (even if 
you’re  flat-footed  or  it  isn’t  your  turn).  Unconscious  creatures  are  
automatically  considered  willing,  but  a  character  who  is  conscious  
but immobile or helpless (such as one who is bound, cowering, grap-
pling, paralyzed, pinned, or stunned) is not automatically willing. 
Some  spells,  such  as  flaming  sphere  and  spiritual weapon, allow you 
to  redirect  the  effect  to  new  targets  or  areas  after  you  cast  the  spell.  
Redirecting a spell is a move action that does not provoke attacks of 
opportunity. 
Effect:  Some  spells,  such  as  summon  monster  spells,  create  or  
summon things rather than affecting things that are already present. 
You  must  designate  the  location  where  these  things  are  to  appear,  
either  by  seeing  it  or  defining  it  (for  example,  “The  insect plague will 
appear  20  feet  into  the  area  of  darkness  that  the  nagas  are  hiding  
in”). Range determines how far away an effect can appear, but if the 
effect  is  mobile  (a  summoned  monster,  for  instance),  it  can  move  
regardless of the spell’s range. 
Ray:  Some  effects  are  rays  (for  example,  ray  of  enfeeblement).  You  
aim  a  ray  as  if  using  a  ranged  weapon,  though  typically  you  make  a  
ranged  touch  attack  rather  than  a  normal  ranged  attack.  As  with  a  
ranged weapon, you can fire into the dark or at an invisible creature 
and  hope  you  hit  something.  You  don’t  have  to  see  the  creature  
you’re  trying  to  hit,  as  you  do  with  a  targeted  spell.  Intervening  
creatures  and  obstacles,  however,  can  block  your  line  of  sight  or  
provide cover for the creature you’re aiming at. 
If a ray spell has a duration, it’s the duration of the effect that the 
ray causes, not the length of time the ray itself persists. 
If  a  ray  spell  deals  damage,  you  can  score  a  critical  hit  just  as  if  it  
were a weapon. A ray spell threatens a critical hit on a natural roll of 
20 and deals double damage on a successful critical hit. 
Spread:  Some  effects,  notably  clouds  and  fogs,  spread  out  from  a  
point  of  origin,  which  must  be  a  grid  intersection.  The  effect  can  
extend  around  corners  and  into  areas  that  you  can’t  see.  Figure  dis-
tance by actual distance traveled, taking into account turns the spell 
effect  takes.  When  determining  distance  for  spread  effects,  count  
around  walls,  not  through  them.  As  with  movement,  do  not  trace  
diagonals across corners. You must designate the point of origin for 
such an effect, but you need not have line of effect (see below) to all 
portions of the effect. Example: obscuring mist. 
Area:  Some  spells  affect  an  area.  Sometimes  a  spell  description  
specifies a specially defined area, but usually an area falls into one of 
the categories defined below. 
Regardless of the shape of the area, you select the point where the 
spell  originates,  but  otherwise  you  don’t  control  which  creatures  or  
objects the spell affects. The point of origin of a spell is always a grid 
intersection.  When  determining  whether  a  given  creature  is  within  
the area of a spell, count out the distance from the point of origin in 
squares   just   as   you   do   when   moving   a   character   or   when   
determining  the  range  for  a  ranged  attack.  The  only  difference  is  
that instead of counting from the center of one square to the center 
of  the  next,  you  count  from  intersection  to  intersection.  You  can  
count  diagonally  across  a  square,  but  remember  that  every  second  
diagonal counts as 2 squares of distance. If the far edge of a square is 
within  the  spell’s  area,  anything  within  that  square  is  within  the  
spell’s area. If the spell’s area only touches the near edge of a square, 
however, anything within that square is unaffected by the spell. 
Burst, Emanation, or Spread: Most spells that affect an area function 
as  a  burst,  an  emanation,  or  a  spread.  In  each  case,  you  select  the  
spell’s point of origin and measure its effect from that point. 
A burst spell affects whatever it catches in its area, even including 
creatures that you can’t see. For instance, if you can designate a four-
way  intersection  of  corridors  to  be  the  point  of  origin  of  a  dispel 
magic  spell,  the  spell  bursts  in  all  four  directions,  possibly  catching  
creatures  that  you  can’t  see  because  they’re  around  the  corner  from  
you  but  not  from  the  point  of  origin.  It  can’t  affect  creatures  with  
total  cover  from  its  point  of  origin  (in  other  words,  its  effects  don’t  
extend  around  corners).  The  default  shape  for  a  burst  effect  is  a  
sphere,  but  some  burst  spells  are  specifically  described  as  cone-
shaped.  A  burst’s  area  defines  how  far  from  the  point  of  origin  the  
spell’s effect extends. Example: holy smite. 
An  emanation  spell  functions  like  a  burst  spell,  except  that  the  
effect  continues  to  radiate  from  the  point  of  origin  for  the  duration  
of  the  spell.  Most  emanations  are  cones  or  spheres.  Example:  detect 
magic. 
A  spread  spell  spreads  out  like  a  burst  but  can  turn  corners.  You  
select  the  point  of  origin,  and  the  spell  spreads  out  a  given  distance  
in  all  directions.  Figure  the  area  the  spell  effect  fills  by  taking  into  
account any turns the spell effect takes. Example: fireball. 
Cone, Cylinder, Line, or Sphere: Most spells that affect an area have a 
particular shape, such as a cone, cylinder, line, or sphere. 
A  cone-shaped  spell  shoots  away  from  you  in  a  quarter-circle  in  
the direction you designate. It starts from any corner of your square 
and  widens  out  as  it  goes.  Most  cones  are  either  bursts  or  emana-
tions (see above), and thus won’t go around corners. Example: cone of 
cold. 
When  casting  a  cylinder-shaped  spell,  you  select  the  spell’s  point  
of origin. This point is the center of a horizontal circle, and the spell 
shoots  down  from  the  circle,  filling  a  cylinder.  A  cylinder-shaped  
spell ignores any obstructions within its area. Example: flame strike. 
A line-shaped spell shoots away from you in a line in the direction 
you designate. It starts from any corner of your square and extends 
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
176 
to the limit of its range or until it strikes a barrier that blocks line of 
effect. A line-shaped spell affects all creatures in squares that the line 
passes through. Example: lightning bolt. 
A  sphere-shaped  spell  expands  from  its  point  of  origin  to  fill  a  
spherical   area.   Spheres   may   be   bursts,   emanations,   or   spreads.   
Example: globe of invulnerability. 
Creatures:  A  spell  with  this  kind  of  area  affects  creatures  directly  
(like  a  targeted  spell),  but  it  affects  all  creatures  in  an  area  of  some  
kind rather than individual creatures you select. The area might be a 
spherical  burst  (such  as  sleep),  a  cone-shaped  burst  (such  as  fear),  or  
some other shape. 
Many  spells  affect  “living  creatures,”  which  means  all  creatures  
other  than  constructs  and  undead.  The  sleep  spell,  for  instance,  
affects  only  living  creatures.  If  you  cast  sleep  in  the  midst  of  gnolls  
and  skeletons,  the  sleep  spell  ignores  the  skeletons  and  affects  the  
gnolls. The skeletons do not count against the creatures affected. 
Objects: A spell with this kind of area affects objects within an area 
you select (as Creatures, but affecting objects instead). 
Other: A spell can have a unique area, as defined in its description. 
(S)  Shapeable:  If  an  Area  or  Effect  entry  ends  with  “(S),”  you  can  
shape  the  spell.  A  shaped  effect  or  area  can  have  no  dimension  
smaller than 10 feet. Many effects or areas are given as cubes to ma-
ke it easy to model irregular shapes. Three-dimensional volumes are 
most often needed to define aerial or underwater effects and areas. 
Line  of  Effect:  A  line  of  effect  is  a  straight,  unblocked  path  that  
indicates what a spell can affect. A line of effect is canceled by a solid 
barrier. It’s like line of sight for ranged weapons, except that it’s not 
blocked by fog, darkness, and other factors that limit normal sight. 
You  must  have  a  clear  line  of  effect  to  any  target  that  you  cast  a  
spell  on  or  to  any  space  in  which  you  wish  to  create  an  effect  (such  
as  conjuring  a  monster).  You  must  have  a  clear  line  of  effect  to  the  
point of origin of any spell you cast, such as the center of a fireball. A 
burst,   cone,   cylinder,   or   emanation   spell   affects   only   an   area,   
creatures,  or  objects  to  which  it  has  line  of  effect  from  its  origin  (a  
spherical burst’s center point, a cone-shaped burst’s starting point, a 
cylinder’s circle, or an emanation’s point of origin). 
An  otherwise  solid  barrier  with  a  hole  of  at  least  1  square  foot  
through  it  does  not  block  a  spell’s  line  of  effect.  Such  an  opening  
means that the 5-foot length of wall containing the hole is no longer 
considered a barrier for purposes of a spell’s line of effect. 
 
DURATION 
A spell’s Duration entry tells you how long the magical energy of the 
spell lasts. 
Timed   Durations:   Many   durations   are   measured   in   rounds,   
minutes,  hours,  or  some  other  increment.  When  the  time  is  up,  the  
magic  goes  away  and  the  spell  ends.  If  a  spell’s  duration  is  variable  
(power word stun, for example) the DM rolls it secretly. 
Instantaneous: The spell energy comes and goes the instant the 
spell  is  cast,  though  the  consequences  might  be  long-lasting.  For  
example,  a  cure  light  wounds  spell  lasts  only  an  instant,  but  the  
healing it bestows never runs out or goes away. 
Permanent:  The  energy  remains  as  long  as  the  effect  does.  This  
means the spell is vulnerable to dispel magic.  Example: secret page. 
Concentration:  The  spell  lasts  as  long  as  you  concentrate  on  it.  
Concentrating  to  maintain  a  spell  is  a  standard  action  that  does  not  
provoke  attacks  of  opportunity.  Anything  that  could  break  your  
concentration   when   casting   a   spell   can   also   break   your   con-
centration  while  you’re  maintaining  one,  causing  the  spell  to  end.  
You  can’t  cast  a  spell  while  concentrating  on  another  one.  Some-
times a spell lasts for a short time after you cease concentrating. For 
example, the spell hypnotic pattern has a duration of concentration + 2 
rounds. In such a case, the spell keeps going for the given length of 
time  after  you  stop  concentrating,  but  no  longer.  Otherwise,  you  
must concentrate to maintain the spell, but you can’t maintain it for 
more  than  a  stated  duration  in  any  event.  If  a  target  moves  out  of  
range, the spell reacts as if your concentration had been broken. 
Subjects,   Effects,   and   Areas:   If   the   spell   affects   creatures   
directly  (for  example,  charm  person),  the  result  travels  with  the  sub-
jects  for  the  spell’s  duration.  If  the  spell  creates  an  effect,  the  effect  
lasts  for  the  duration.  The  effect  might  move  (for  example,  a  sum-
moned  monster  might  chase  your  enemies)  or  remain  still.  Such  an  
effect can be destroyed prior to when its duration ends (for example, 
fog  cloud  can  be  dispersed  by  wind).  If  the  spell  affects  an  area,  as  
silence  does,  then  the  spell  stays  with  that  area  for  its  duration.  
Creatures  become  subject  to  the  spell  when  they  enter  the  area  and  
are no longer subject to it when they leave. 
Touch  Spells  and  Holding  the  Charge:  In  most  cases,  if  you  
don’t  discharge  a  touch  spell  on  the  round  you  cast  it,  you  can  hold  
the  charge  (postpone  the  discharge  of  the  spell)  indefinitely.  You  
can make touch attacks round after round. If you cast another spell, 
the touch spell dissipates. 
Some  touch  spells,  such  as  teleport  and  water  walk,  allow  you  to  
touch multiple targets as part of the spell. You can’t hold the charge 
of  such  a  spell;  you  must  touch  all  targets  of  the  spell  in  the  same  
round that you finish casting the spell. 
Discharge:  Occasionally  a  spells  lasts  for  a  set  duration  or  until  
triggered  or  discharged.  For  instance,  magic  mouth  waits  until  trig-
gered, and the spell ends once the mouth has said its message. 
(D)  Dismissible:  If  the  Duration  line  ends  with  “(D),”  you  can  
dismiss  the  spell  at  will.  You  must  be  within  range  of  the  spell’s  
effect  and  must  speak  words  of  dismissal,  which  are  usually  a  mod-
ified form of the spell’s verbal component. If the spell has no verbal 
component,  you  can  dismiss  the  effect  with  a  gesture.  Dismissing  a  
spell  is  a  standard  action  that  does  not  provoke  attacks  of  opportu-
nity. A spell that depends on concentration is dismissible by its very 
nature,  and  dismissing  it  does  not  take  an  action,  since  all  you  have  
to do to end the spell is to stop concentrating on your turn. 
 
SAVING THROW 
Usually  a  harmful  spell  allows  a  target  to  make  a  saving  throw  to  
avoid  some  or  all  of  the  effect.  The  Saving  Throw  entry  in  a  spell  
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
177
description defines which type of saving throw the spell allows and 
describes how saving throws against the spell work. 
Negates:  The  spell  has  no  effect  on  a  subject  that  makes  a  suc-
cessful saving throw. 
Partial: The spell causes an effect on its subject, such as death. A 
successful  saving  throw  means  that  some  lesser  effect  occurs  (such  
as being dealt damage rather than being killed). 
Half:  The  spell  deals  damage,  and  a  successful  saving  throw  
halves the damage taken (round down). 
None: No saving throw is allowed. 
Disbelief: A successful save lets the subject ignore the effect. 
(object):  The  spell  can  be  cast  on  objects,  which  receive  saving  
throws  only  if  they  are  magical  or  if  they  are  attended  (held,  worn,  
grasped,  or  the  like)  by  a  creature  resisting  the  spell,  in  which  case  
the  object  uses  the  creature’s  saving  throw  bonus  unless  its  own  
bonus  is  greater.  (This  notation  does  not  mean  that  a  spell  can  be  
cast only on objects. Some spells of this sort can be cast on creatures 
or objects.) A magic item’s saving throw bonuses are each equal to 2 
+ one-half the item’s caster level. 
(harmless):  The  spell  is  usually  beneficial,  not  harmful,  but  a  
targeted creature can attempt a saving throw if it desires. 
Saving  Throw  Difficulty  Class:  A  saving  throw  against  your  
spell has a DC of 10 + the level of the spell + your bonus for the rel-
evant  ability  (Intelligence  for  a  wizard,  Charisma  for  a  sorcerer  or  
bard, or Wisdom for a cleric, druid, paladin, or ranger). A spell’s level 
can  vary  depending  on  your  class.  For  example,  a  fire  trap  is  a  2nd-
level  spell  for  a  druid  but  a  4th-level  spell  for  a  sorcerer  or  wizard.  
Always use the spell level applicable to your class. 
Succeeding  on  a  Saving  Throw:  A  creature  that  successfully  
saves  against  a  spell  that  has  no  obvious  physical  effects  feels  a  
hostile  force  or  a  tingle,  but  cannot  deduce  the  exact  nature  of  the  
attack.  For  example,  if  you  secretly  cast  charm  person  on  a  creature  
and  its  saving  throw  succeeds,  it  knows  that  someone  used  magic  
against  it,  but  it  can’t  tell  what  you  were  trying  to  do.  Likewise,  if  a  
creature’s  saving  throw  succeeds  against  a  targeted  spell,  such  as  
charm  person,  you  sense  that  the  spell  has  failed.  You  do  not  sense  
when creatures succeed on saves against effect and area spells. 
Automatic Failures and Successes: A natural 1 (the d20 comes 
up  1)  on  a  saving  throw  is  always  a  failure,  and  the  spell  may  cause  
damage to exposed items (see Items Surviving after a Saving Throw, 
below). A natural 20 (the d20 comes up 20) is always a success. 
Voluntarily  Giving  up  a  Saving  Throw:  A  creature  can  volun-
tarily forego a saving throw and willingly accept a spell’s result. Even 
a  character  with  a  special  resistance  to  magic  (for  example,  an  elf’s  
resistance to sleep effects) can suppress this quality. 
 
Table 10–1: Items Affected by Magical Attacks 
Order
1
           Item           
1st                  Shield                  
2nd                Armor                
3rd Magic helmet, hat, or headband 
4th Item in hand (including weapon, wand, or the like) 
5th                 Magic                 cloak                 
6th Stowed or sheathed weapon 
7th                 Magic                 bracers                 
8th                 Magic                 clothing                 
9th Magic jewelry (including rings) 
10th               Anything               else               
1 In order of most likely to least likely to be affected.
 
 
Items  Surviving  after  a  Saving  Throw:  Unless  the  descriptive  
text  for  the  spell  specifies  otherwise,  all  items  carried  or  worn  by  a  
creature are assumed to survive a magical attack. If a creature rolls a 
natural 1 on its saving throw against the effect, however, an exposed 
item is harmed (if the attack can harm objects). Refer to Table 10–1: 
Items  Affected  by  Magical  Attacks.  Determine  which  four  objects  
carried or worn by the creature are most likely to be affected and roll 
randomly  among  them.  The  randomly  determined  item  must  make  
a  saving  throw  against  the  attack  form  and  take  whatever  damage  
the  attack  deal  (see  Smashing  an  Object,  page  165).  For  instance,  
Tordek is hit by a lightning  bolt  and  gets  a  natural  1  on  his  saving  
throw.  The  items  of  his  most  likely  to  have  been  affected  are  his  
shield,   his   armor,   his   waraxe   (in   his   hand),   and   his   shortbow   
(stowed). (He doesn’t have magic headgear or a magic cloak, so those 
entries are skipped.) 
If an item is not carried or worn and is not magical, it does not get 
a saving throw. It simply is dealt the appropriate damage. 
 
SPELL RESISTANCE 
Spell  resistance  is  a  special  defensive  ability.  If  your  spell  is  being  
resisted  by  a  creature  with  spell  resistance,  you  must  make  a  caster  
level  check  (1d20  +  caster  level)  at  least  equal  to  the  creature’s  spell  
resistance  for  the  spell  to  affect  that  creature.  The  defender’s  spell  
resistance  is  like  an  Armor  Class  against  magical  attacks.  The  Dun-
geon  Master’s  Guide  has  more  details  on  spell  resistance.  Include  any  
adjustments  to  your  caster  level  (such  as  from  domain  granted  
powers) to this caster level check. 
The  Spell  Resistance  entry  and  the  descriptive  text  of  a  spell  
description tell you whether spell resistance protects creatures from 
the   spell.   In   many   cases,   spell   resistance   applies   only   when   a   
resistant  creature  is  targeted  by  the  spell,  not  when  a  resistant  crea-
ture encounters a spell that is already in place. 
The  terms  “object”  and  “harmless”  mean  the  same  thing  for  spell  
resistance   as   they   do   for   saving   throws.   A   creature   with   spell   
resistance  must  voluntarily  lower  the  resistance  (a  standard  action)  
in  order  to  be  affected  by  a  spell  noted  as  harmless.  In  such  a  case,  
you do not need to make the caster level check described above. 
 
DESCRIPTIVE TEXT 
This  portion  of  a  spell  description  details  what  the  spell  does  and  
how  it  works.  If  one  of  the  previous  entries  in  the  description  
included  “see  text,”  this  is  where  the  explanation  is  found.  If  the  
spell   you’re   reading   about   is   based   on   another   spell   (see   Spell   
Chains, page 181), you might have to refer to a different spell for the 
“see text” information. 
 
ARCANE SPELLS 
Wizards,  sorcerers,  and  bards  cast  arcane  spells,  which  involve  the  
direct manipulation of mystic energies. These manipulations require 
natural  talent  (in  the  case  of  sorcerers),  long  study  (in  the  case  of  
wizards),  or  both  (in  the  case  of  bards).  Compared  to  divine  spells,  
arcane  spells  are  more  likely  to  produce  dramatic  results,  such  as  
flight, explosions, or transformations. 
 
PREPARING WIZARD SPELLS 
Before  setting  out  on  an  adventure  with  her  companions,  Mialee  
pores  over  her  spellbook  and  prepares  two  1st-level  spells  (one  for  
being a 1st-level wizard and an additional one as her 1st-level bonus 
spell    for    Intelligence    15)    and    three    0-level    spells.    (Arcane    
spellcasters often call their 0-level spells “cantrips.”) From the spells 
in  her  spellbook,  she  chooses  charm  person, sleep, detect magic (twice), 
and light.  While  traveling,  she  and  her  party  are  attacked  by  gnoll  
raiders,  and  she  casts  her  sleep  spell.  After  she  and  her  companions  
have dispatched the gnolls, she casts detect magic to see whether any 
of  the  gnolls’  items  are  enchanted.  (They’re  not.)  The  party  then  
camps  for  the  night  in  the  wilderness.  Come  morning,  Mialee  can  
once again prepare spells from her spellbook. She already has charm 
person, detect  magic  (once),  and  light  prepared  from  the  day  before.  
She  chooses  to  abandon  her  light  spell  and  then  prepare  sleep, detect 
magic,  and  ghost  sound.  It  takes  her  a  little  over  half  an  hour  to  
prepare  these  spells  because  they  represent  a  little  over  half  of  her  
daily capacity. 
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
178 
A  wizard’s  level  limits  the  number  of  spells  she  can  prepare  and  
cast  (see  Table  3–18:  The  Wizard,  page  55).  Her  high  Intelligence  
score  (see  Table  1–1:  Ability  Modifiers  and  Bonus  Spells,  page  8)  
might  allow  her  to  prepare  a  few  extra  spells.  She  can  prepare  the  
same spell more than once, but each preparation counts as one spell 
toward  her  daily  limit.  Preparing  an  arcane  spell  is  an  arduous  
mental task. To do so, the wizard must have an Intelligence score of 
at least 10 + the spell’s level. 
Rest: To prepare her daily spells, a wizard must have a clear mind. 
To  clear  her  mind  she  must  first  sleep  for  8  hours.  The  wizard  does  
not  have  to  slumber  for  every  minute  of  the  time,  but  she  must  
refrain  from  movement,  combat,  spellcasting,  skill  use,  conversa-
tion,  or  any  other  fairly  demanding  physical  or  mental  task  during  
the  rest  period.  If  her  rest  is  interrupted,  each  interruption  adds  1  
hour to the total amount of time she has to rest in order to clear her 
mind, and she must have at least 1 hour of uninterrupted rest imme-
diately  prior  to  preparing  her  spells.  If  the  character  does  not  need  
to  sleep  for  some  reason,  she  still  must  have  8  hours  of  restful  calm  
before preparing any spells. For example, elf wizards need 8 hours of 
rest to clear their minds. Thus, an elf wizard could trance for 4 hours 
and rest for 4 hours, then prepare spells. 
Recent Casting Limit/Rest Interruptions: If a wizard has cast 
spells  recently,  the  drain  on  her  resources  reduces  her  capacity  to  
prepare new spells. When she prepares spells for the coming day, all 
the spells she has cast within the last 8 hours count against her daily 
limit. If Mialee can normally cast two 1st-level spells per day, but she 
had  to  cast  magic  missile  during  the  night,  she  can  prepare  only  one  
1st-level spell the next day. 
Preparation  Environment:  To  prepare  any  spell,  a  wizard  must  
have   enough   peace,   quiet,   and   comfort   to   allow   for   proper   
concentration. The wizard’s surroundings need not be luxurious, but 
they  must  be  free  from  overt  distractions.  Exposure  to  inclement  
weather prevents the necessary concentration, as does any injury or 
failed  saving  throw  the  character  might  experience  while  studying.  
Wizards also must have access to their spellbooks to study from and 
sufficient  light  to  read  them  by.  There  is  one  major  exception:  A  
wizard  can  prepare  a  read  magic  spell  even  without  a  spellbook.  A  
great  portion  of  her  initial  training  goes  into  mastering  this  minor  
but vital feat of magic. 
Spell  Preparation  Time:  After  resting,  a  wizard  must  study  her  
spellbook  to  prepare  any  spells  that  day.  If  she  wants  to  prepare  all  
her spells, the process takes 1 hour. Preparing some smaller portion 
of  her  daily  capacity  takes  a  proportionally  smaller  amount  of  time,  
but  always  at  least  15  minutes,  the  minimum  time  required  to  
achieve the proper mental state. 
Spell Selection and Preparation: Until she prepares spells from 
her  spellbook,  the  only  spells  a  wizard  has  available  to  cast  are  the  
ones  that  she  already  had  prepared  from  the  previous  day  and  has  
not  yet  used.  During  the  study  period,  she  chooses  which  spells  to  
prepare.  The  act  of  preparing  a  spell  is  actually  the  first  step  in  
casting   it.   A   spell   is   designed   in   such   a   way   that   it   has   an   
interruption  point  near  its  end.  This  allows  a  wizard  to  cast  most  of  
the  spell  ahead  of  time  and  finish  when  it’s  needed,  even  if  she  is  
under  considerable  pressure.  Her  spellbook  serves  as  a  guide  to  the  
mental  exercises  she  must  perform  to  create  the  spell’s  effect.  If  a  
wizard  already  has  spells  prepared  (from  the  previous  day)  that  she  
has not cast, she can abandon some or all of them to make room for 
new spells. 
When  preparing  spells  for  the  day,  a  wizard  can  leave  some  of  
these  spell  slots  open.  Later  during  that  day,  she  can  repeat  the  
preparation  process  as  often  as  she  likes,  time  and  circumstances  
permitting.  During  these  extra  sessions  of  preparation,  the  wizard  
can  fill  these  unused  spell  slots.  She  cannot,  however,  abandon  a  
previously prepared spell to replace it with another one or fill a slot 
that is empty because she has cast a spell in the meantime. That sort 
of preparation requires a mind fresh from rest. Like the first session 
of  the  day,  this  preparation  takes  at  least  15  minutes,  and  it  takes  
longer if the wizard prepares more than one-quarter of her spells. 
Spell   Slots:  The  various  character  class  tables  in  Chapter  3:  
Classes show how many spells of each level a character can cast per 
day.   These   openings   for   daily   spells   are   called   spell   slots.   A   
spellcaster always has the option to fill a higher-level spell slot with 
a  lower-level  spell.  For  example,  a  7th-level  wizard  has  at  least  one  
4th-level spell slot and two 3rd-level spell slots (see Table 3–18: The 
Wizard,  page  55).  However,  the  character  could  choose  to  prepare  
three  3rd-level  spells  instead,  filling  the  4th-level  slot  with  a  3rd-
level spell. A spellcaster who lacks a high enough ability score to cast 
spells  that  would  otherwise  be  his  or  her  due  still  gets  the  slots  but  
must fill them with spells of lower level. 
Prepared  Spell  Retention:  Once  a  wizard  prepares  a  spell,  it  
remains  in  her  mind  as  a  nearly  cast  spell  until  she  uses  the  pre-
scribed components to complete and trigger it or until she abandons 
it.  Upon  the  casting  of  a  spell,  the  spell’s  energy  is  expended  and  
purged  from  the  character,  leaving  her  feeling  a  little  tired.  Certain  
other  events,  such  as  the  effects  of  magic  items  or  special  attacks  
from monsters, can wipe a prepared spell from a character’s mind. 
Death  and  Prepared  Spell  Retention:  If  a  spellcaster  dies,  all  
prepared  spells  stored  in  his  or  her  mind  are  wiped  away.  Potent  
magic  (such  as  raise  dead, resurrection,  or  true resurrection) can recover 
the lost energy when it recovers the character. 
 
ARCANE MAGICAL WRITINGS 
To  record  an  arcane  spell  in  written  form,  a  character  uses  complex  
notation that describes the magical forces involved in the spell. The 
notation  constitutes  a  universal  arcane  language  that  wizards  have  
discovered, not invented. The writer uses the same system no matter 
what  her  native  language  or  culture.  However,  each  character  uses  
the   system   in   her   own   way.   Another   person’s   magical   writing   
remains  incomprehensible  to  even  the  most  powerful  wizard  until  
she takes time to study and decipher it. 
To  decipher  an  arcane  magical  writing  (such  as  a  single  spell  in  
written form in another’s spellbook or on a scroll), a character must 
make a Spellcraft check (DC 20 + the spell’s level). If the skill check 
fails, the character cannot attempt to read that particular spell again 
until the next day. A read magic spell automatically deciphers a magi-
cal writing without a skill check. If the person who created the mag-
ical writing is on hand to help the reader, success is also automatic. 
Once a character deciphers a particular magical writing, she does 
not  need  to  decipher  it  again.  Deciphering  a  magical  writing  allows  
the  reader  to  identify  the  spell  and  gives  some  idea  of  its  effects  (as  
explained  in  the  spell  description).  If  the  magical  writing  was  a  
scroll  and  the  reader  can  cast  arcane  spells,  she  can  attempt  to  use  
the  scroll  (see  the  information  on  scrolls  in  the  Dungeon  Master’s  
Guide). 
 
Wizard Spells and Borrowed Spellbooks 
A wizard can use a borrowed spellbook to prepare a spell she already 
knows  and  has  recorded  in  her  own  spellbook,  but  preparation  
success is not assured. First, the wizard must decipher the writing in 
the  book  (see  Arcane  Magical  Writings,  above).  Once  a  spell  from  
another  spellcaster’s  book  is  deciphered,  the  reader  must  make  a  
Spellcraft  check  (DC  15  +  spell’s  level)  to  prepare  the  spell.  If  the  
check  succeeds,  the  wizard  can  prepare  the  spell.  She  must  repeat  
the check to prepare the spell again, no matter how many times she 
has  prepared  it  before.  If  the  check  fails,  she  cannot  try  to  prepare  
the  spell  from  the  same  source  again  until  the  next  day.  (However,  
as  explained  above,  she  does  not  need  to  repeat  a  check  to  decipher  
the writing.) 
 
Adding Spells to a Wizard’s Spellbook 
Wizards  can  add  new  spells  to  their  spellbooks  through  several  
methods.  If  a  wizard  has  chosen  to  specialize  in  a  school  of  magic,  
she can learn spells only from schools whose spells she can cast. 
Spells   Gained   at   a   New   Level:   Wizards   perform   a   certain   
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
179
amount of spell research between adventures. Each time a character 
attains  a  new  wizard  level,  she  gains  two  spells  of  her  choice  to  add  
to  her  spellbook.  These  spells  represent  the  results  of  her  research.  
The  two  free  spells  must  be  of  spell  levels  she  can  cast.  If  she  has  
chosen  to  specialize  in  a  school  of  magic,  one  of  the  two  free  spells  
must be from her specialty school. 
Spells Copied from Another’s Spellbook or a Scroll: A wizard 
can  also  add  a  spell  to  her  book  whenever  she  encounters  one  on  a  
magic  scroll  or  in  another  wizard’s  spellbook.  No  matter  what  the  
spell’s  source,  the  wizard  must  first  decipher  the  magical  writing  
(see  Arcane  Magical  Writings,  above).  Next,  she  must  spend  a  day  
studying the spell. At the end of the day, she must make a Spellcraft 
check  (DC  15  +  spell’s  level).  A  wizard  who  has  specialized  in  a  
school  of  spells  gains  a  +2  bonus  on  the  Spellcraft  check  if  the  new  
spell  is  from  her  specialty  school.  She  cannot,  however,  learn  any  
spells from her prohibited schools. 
If  the  check  succeeds,  the  wizard  understands  the  spell  and  can  
copy it into her spellbook (see Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook, 
below).   The   process   leaves   a   spellbook   that   was   copied   from   
unharmed,  but  a  spell  successfully  copied  from  a  magic  scroll  dis-
appears from the parchment. 
If the check fails, the wizard cannot understand or copy the spell. 
She  cannot  attempt  to  learn  or  copy  that  spell  again  until  she  gains  
another  rank  in  Spellcraft.  A  spell  that  was  being  copied  from  a  
scroll does not vanish from the scroll. 
In  most  cases,  wizards  charge  a  fee  for  the  privilege  of  copying  
spells  from  their  spellbooks.  This  fee  is  usually  equal  to  the  spell’s  
level  ×  50  gp,  though  many  wizards  jealously  guard  their  higher-
level spells and may charge much more, or even deny access to them 
altogether.  Wizards  friendly  to  one  another  often  trade  access  to  
equal-level spells from each other’s spellbooks at no cost. 
Independent   Research:   A   wizard   also   can   research   a   spell   
independently,  duplicating  an  existing  spell  or  creating  an  entirely  
new  one.  The  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  has  information  on  this  topic  
under Creating New Spells in Chapter 2. 
 
Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook 
Once  a  wizard  understands  a  new  spell,  she  can  record  it  into  her  
spellbook. 
Time: The process takes 24 hours, regardless of the spell’s level. 
Space  in  the  Spellbook:  A  spell  takes  up  one  page  of  the  spell-
book  per  spell  level,  so  a  2nd-level  spell  takes  two  pages,  a  5th-level  
spell  takes  five  pages,  and  so  forth.  Even  a  0-level  spell  (cantrip)  
takes one page. A spellbook has one hundred pages. 
Materials  and  Costs:  Materials  for  writing  the  spell  (special  
quills, inks, and other supplies) cost 100 gp per page. 
Note that a wizard does not have to pay these costs in time or gold 
for  the  spells  she  gains  for  free  at  each  new  level.  She  simply  adds  
these to her spellbook as part of her ongoing research. 
 
Replacing and Copying Spellbooks 
A  wizard  can  use  the  procedure  for  learning  a  spell  to  reconstruct  a  
lost spellbook. If she already has a particular spell prepared, she can 
write  it  directly  into  a  new  book  at  a  cost  of  100  gp  per  page  (as  
noted  in  Writing  a  New  Spell  into  a  Spellbook,  above).  The  process  
wipes  the  prepared  spell  from  her  mind,  just  as  casting  it  would.  If  
she  does  not  have  the  spell  prepared,  she  can  prepare  it  from  a  bor-
rowed spellbook and then write it into a new book. 
Duplicating  an  existing  spellbook  uses  the  same  procedure  as  
replacing  it,  but  the  task  is  much  easier.  The  time  requirement  and  
cost per page are halved. 
 
Selling a Spellbook 
Captured  spellbooks  can  be  sold  for  a  gp  amount  equal  to  one-half  
the cost of purchasing and inscribing the spells within (that is, one-
half  of  100  gp  per  page  of  spells).  A  spellbook  entirely  filled  with  
spells  (that  is,  with  one  hundred  pages  of  spells  inscribed  in  it)  is  
worth 5,000 gp. 
SORCERERS AND BARDS 
Sorcerers  and  bards  cast  arcane  spells,  but  they  do  not  have  spell-
books  and  do  not  prepare  their  spells.  A  sorcerer’s  or  bard’s  class  
level   limits   the   number   of   spells   he   can   cast   (see   these   class   
descriptions  in  Chapter  3:  Classes).  His  high  Charisma  score  (see  
Table  1–1:  Ability  Modifiers  and  Bonus  Spells,  page  8)  might  allow  
him  to  cast  a  few  extra  spells.  A  member  of  either  class  must  have  a  
Charisma score of at least 10 + a spell’s level to cast the spell. 
Daily  Readying  of  Spells:  Each  day,  sorcerers  and  bards  must  
focus  their  minds  on  the  task  of  casting  their  spells.  A  sorcerer  or  
bard needs 8 hours of rest (just like a wizard), after which he spends 
15  minutes  concentrating.  (A  bard  must  sing,  recite,  or  play  an  
instrument  of  some  kind  while  concentrating.)  During  this  period,  
the  sorcerer  or  bard  readies  his  mind  to  cast  his  daily  allotment  of  
spells.  Without  such  a  period  to  refresh  himself,  the  character  does  
not regain the spell slots he used up the day before. 
For  example,  at  7th  level,  Gimble  the  bard  can  cast  one  3rd-level  
spell  (a  bonus  spell  due  to  his  16  Charisma).  If  he  casts  a  3rd-level  
spell,  he  can’t  use  his  3rd-level  spell  slot  again  until  the  next  day—
after he readies his spells for the day. 
Recent  Casting  Limit:  As  with  wizards,  any  spells  cast  within  
the last 8 hours count against the sorcerer’s or bard’s daily limit. 
Adding Spells to a Sorcerer’s or Bard’s Repertoire: A sorcerer 
or bard gains spells each time he attains a new level in his class and 
never gains spells any other way. When your sorcerer or bard gains a 
new  level,  consult  Table  3–5:  Bard  Spells  Known  or  Table  3–17:  
Sorcerer   Spells   Known   to   learn   how   many   spells   from   the   
appropriate  spell  list  in  Chapter  11:  Spells  he  now  knows.  With  the  
DM’s  permission,  sorcerers  and  bards  can  also  select  the  spells  they  
gain  from  new  and  unusual  spells  that  they  have  gained  some  
understanding of (see Spells in the sorcerer description, page 54). 
For  instance,  when  Hennet  the  sorcerer  becomes  2nd  level,  he  
gains  an  additional  0-level  spell.  He  can  pick  that  spell  from  the  0-
level  spells  on  the  sorcerer  and  wizard  spell  list,  or  he  might  have  
learned an unusual spell from an arcane scroll or spellbook. 
 
DIVINE SPELLS 
Clerics,  druids,  experienced  paladins,  and  experienced  rangers  can  
cast  divine  spells.  Unlike  arcane  spells,  divine  spells  draw  power  
from  a  divine  source.  Clerics  gain  spell  power  from  deities  or  from  
divine  forces.  The  divine  force  of  nature  powers  druid  and  ranger  
spells.  The  divine  forces  of  law  and  good  power  paladin  spells.  
Divine  spells  tend  to  focus  on  healing  and  protection  and  are  less  
flashy, destructive, and disruptive than arcane spells. 
 
PREPARING DIVINE SPELLS 
Divine  spellcasters  prepare  their  spells  in  largely  the  same  manner  
as  wizards  do,  but  with  a  few  differences.  The  relevant  ability  for  
divine  spells  is  Wisdom.  To  prepare  a  divine  spell,  a  character  must  
have a Wisdom score of 10 + the spell’s level. For example, a cleric or 
druid  must  have  a  Wisdom  score  of  at  least  10  to  prepare  a  0-level  
spell  and  a  Wisdom  score  of  11  to  prepare  a  1st-level  spell.  (Divine  
spellcasters  often  call  their  0-level  spells  “orisons.”)  Likewise,  bonus  
spells are based on Wisdom. 
Time  of  Day:  A  divine  spellcaster  chooses  and  prepares  spells  
ahead  of  time,  just  as  a  wizard  does.  However,  a  divine  spellcaster  
does  not  require  a  period  of  rest  to  prepare  spells.  Instead,  the  
character  chooses  a  particular  part  of  the  day  to  pray  and  receive  
spells.  The  time  is  usually  associated  with  some  daily  event.  Dawn,  
dusk, noon, and midnight are common choices. Some deities set the 
time  or  impose  other  special  conditions  for  granting  spells  to  their  
clerics.  If  some  event  prevents  a  character  from  praying  at  the  
proper time, he must do so as soon as possible. If the character does 
not stop to pray for spells at the first opportunity, he must wait until 
the next day to prepare spells. 
Spell  Selection  and  Preparation:  A  divine  spellcaster  selects  
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
180 
and prepares spells ahead of time through prayer and meditation at a 
particular  time  of  day.  The  time  required  to  prepare  spells  is  the  
same  as  it  is  for  a  wizard  (1  hour),  as  is  the  requirement  for  a  
relatively  peaceful  environment.  A  divine  spellcaster  does  not  have  
to  prepare  all  his  spells  at  once.  However,  the  character’s  mind  is  
considered  fresh  only  during  his  or  her  first  daily  spell  preparation,  
so  a  divine  spellcaster  cannot  fill  a  slot  that  is  empty  because  he  or  
she has cast a spell or abandoned a previously prepared spell. 
Divine  spellcasters  do  not  require  spellbooks.  However,  such  a  
character’s spell selection is limited to the spells on the list for his or 
her  class  (see  Chapter  11:  Spells).  Clerics,  druids,  paladins,  and  
rangers  have  separate  spell  lists.  A  cleric  also  has  access  to  two  
domains  determined  during  his  character  creation.  Each  domain  
gives him access to a domain spell at each spell level from 1st to 9th, 
as well as a special granted power. With access to two domain spells 
at  each  spell  level—one  from  each  of  his  two  domains—a  cleric  
must prepare, as an extra domain spell, one or the other each day for 
each  level  of  spell  he  can  cast.  (The  extra  domain  spell  is  the  “+1”  
that appears as part of the cleric’s Spells per Day figure on Table 3–6: 
The Cleric, page 31.) If a domain spell is not on the cleric spell list, it 
can be prepared only in a domain spell slot. 
Spell Slots: The character class tables in Chapter 3: Classes show 
how  many  spells  of  each  level  a  character  can  cast  per  day.  These  
openings  for  daily  spells  are  called  spell  slots.  A  spellcaster  always  
has the option to fill a higher-level spell slot with a lower-level spell. 
For example, a 7th-level cleric has at least one 4th-level spell slot and 
two 3rd-level spell slots. However, he could choose to prepare three 
3rd-level  spells  instead,  filling  the  4th-level  slot  with  a  lower-level  
spell.  Similarly,  he  could  fill  his  4th-level  domain  spell  slot  with  a  
lower-level  domain  spell.  A  spellcaster  who  lacks  a  high  enough  
ability score to cast spells that would otherwise be his or her due still 
gets  the  slots  but  must  fill  them  with  spells  of  lower  level.  For  
example,  a  9th-level  cleric  who  has  a  Wisdom  score  of  only  14  
cannot  cast  a  5th-level  spell  but  can  prepare  an  extra  lower-level  
spell in its place and store it in the 5th-level spell slot. 
Recent  Casting  Limit:  As  with  arcane  spells,  at  the  time  of  
preparation any spells cast within the previous 8 hours count against 
the number of spells that can be prepared. 
Spontaneous  Casting  of  Cure  and  Inflict  Spells:  A  good  cleric  
(or  a  cleric  of  a  good  deity)  can  spontaneously  cast  a  cure  spell  in  
place of a prepared spell of the same level or higher, but not in place 
of a domain spell. An evil cleric (or a cleric of an evil deity) can spon-
taneously  cast  an  inflict spell in place of a prepared spell (one that is 
not  a  domain  spell)  of  the  same  level  or  higher.  Each  neutral  cleric  
of  a  neutral  deity  either  spontaneously  casts  cure  spells  like  a  good  
cleric  or  inflict  spells  like  an  evil  one,  depending  on  which  option  
the  player  chooses  when  creating  the  character.  The  divine  energy  
of  the  spell  that  the  cure  or  inflict  spell  substitutes  for  is  converted  
into  the  cure  or  inflict  spell  as  if  that  spell  had  been  prepared  all  
along. 
Spontaneous  Casting  of  Summon  Nature’s  Ally  Spells:  A  druid  
can  spontaneously  cast  a  summon  nature’s  ally  spell  in  place  of  a  pre-
pared  spell  of  the  same  level  or  higher.  The  divine  energy  of  the  
spell  that  the  summon  nature’s  ally  spell  substitutes  for  is  converted  
into the summon spell as if that spell had been prepared all along. 
 
DIVINE MAGICAL WRITINGS 
Divine  spells  can  be  written  down  and  deciphered  just  as  arcane  
spells can (see Arcane Magical Writings, above). Any character with 
the   Spellcraft   skill   can   attempt   to   decipher   the   divine   magical   
writing and identify it. However, only characters who have the spell 
in  question  (in  its  divine  form)  on  their  class  spell  list  can  cast  a  
divine spell from a scroll. 
 
NEW DIVINE SPELLS 
Divine  spellcasters  most  frequently  gain  new  spells  in  one  of  the  
following two ways. 
Spells  Gained  at  a  New  Level:  Characters  who  can  cast  divine  
spells  undertake  a  certain  amount  of  study  between  adventures.  
Each  time  such  a  character  receives  a  new  level  of  divine  spells,  he  
or she learns new spells from that level automatically. 
Independent  Research:  A  divine  spellcaster  also  can  research  a  
spell  independently,  much  as  an  arcane  spellcaster  can.  (The  Dun-
geon  Master’s  Guide  has  information  on  this  topic  under  Creating  
New  Spells  in  Chapter  2.)  Only  the  creator  of  such  a  spell  can  
prepare  and  cast  it,  unless  he  decides  to  share  it  with  others.  Some  
such creators share their research with their churches, but others do 
not. The character can create a magic scroll (provided that he or she 
has  the  Scribe  Scroll  feat)  or  write  a  special  text  similar  to  a  spell-
book  to  contain  spells  he  or  she  has  independently  researched.  
Other  divine  spellcasters  who  find  the  spell  in  written  form  can  
learn  to  cast  it,  provided  they  are  of  sufficient  level  to  do  so  and  are  
of the same class as the creator. The process requires deciphering the 
writing (see Arcane Magical Writings, above). 
 
SPECIAL ABILITIES 
Medusas,  dryads,  harpies,  and  other  magical  creatures  can  create  
magical  effects  without  being  spellcasters.  Characters  using  magic  
wands,  rods,  and  other  enchanted  items,  as  well  as  certain  class  
features,  can  also  create  magical  effects.  These  effects  come  in  two  
types:  spell-like  and  supernatural.  Additionally,  members  of  certain  
classes  and  certain  creatures  can  use  special  abilities  that  aren’t  
magical. These abilities are called extraordinary or natural. 
Spell-Like Abilities: A dryad’s charm person effect and the greater 
teleport  ability  of  many  devils  are  spell-like  abilities  Usually,  a  spell-
like  ability  works  just  like  the  spell  of  that  name.  A  few  spell-like  
abilities  are  unique;  these  are  explained  in  the  text  where  they  are  
described. 
A spell-like ability has no verbal, somatic, or material component, 
nor  does  it  require  a  focus  or  have  an  XP  cost.  The  user  activates  it  
mentally.  Armor  never  affects  a  spell-like  ability’s  use,  even  if  the  
ability resembles an arcane spell with a somatic component. A spell-
like  ability  has  a  casting  time  of  1  standard  action  unless  noted  
otherwise in the ability or spell description. In all other ways, a spell-
like ability functions just like a spell. 
Spell-like  abilities  are  subject  to  spell  resistance  and  to  being  dis-
pelled  by  dispel  magic.  They  do  not  function  in  areas  where  magic  is  
suppressed  or  negated,  such  as  an  antimagic  field.  Spell-like  abilities  
cannot be used to counterspell, nor can they be counterspelled. 
Some  creatures  are  actually  sorcerers  of  a  sort.  They  cast  arcane  
spells  as  sorcerers  do,  using  components  when  required.  In  fact,  an  
individual  creature  (such  as  some  dragons)  could  have  some  spell-
like abilities and also cast other spells as a sorcerer. 
Supernatural  Abilities:  A  dragon’s  fiery  breath,  a  medusa’s  pet-
rifying gaze, a spectre’s energy drain, and a cleric’s use of positive or 
negative  energy  to  turn  or  rebuke  undead  are  supernatural  abilities  
These abilities cannot be disrupted in combat, as spells can, and they 
generally   do   not   provoke   attacks   of   opportunity.   Supernatural   
abilities are not subject to spell resistance, counterspells, or to being 
dispelled by dispel magic, and do not function in areas where magic is 
suppressed or negated (such as an antimagic field). 
Extraordinary  Abilities:  A  rogue’s  evasion  ability  and  a  troll’s  
ability   to   regenerate   are   extraordinary   abilities.   These   abilities   
cannot  be  disrupted  in  combat,  as  spells  can,  and  they  generally  do  
not  provoke  attacks  of  opportunity.  Effects  or  areas  that  negate  or  
disrupt magic have no effect on extraordinary abilities. They are not 
subject  to  dispelling,  and  they  function  normally  in  an  antimagic 
field.   Indeed,   extraordinary   abilities   do   not   qualify   as   magical,   
though they may break the laws of physics. 
Natural  Abilities:  This  category  includes  abilities  a  creature  has  
because  of  its  physical  nature,  such  as  a  bird’s  ability  to  fly.  Natural  
abilities   are   those   not   otherwise   designated   as   extraordinary,   
supernatural, or spell-like. 
CHAPTER 10: 
MAGIC
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
his  chapter  begins  with  the  spell  lists  of  the  spellcasting  
classes  and  the  list  of  cleric  domains  and  the  spells  associ-
ated  with  each  domain.  An  
M
  or  
F
  appearing  at  the  end  of  a  
spell’s  name  in  the  spell  lists  denotes  a  spell  with  a  material  or  
focus  component,  respectively,  that  is  not  normally  included  
in  a  spell  component  pouch.  An  
X
  denotes  a  spell  with  an  XP  
component paid by the caster. 
The   remainder   of   the   chapter   contains   spell   descriptions   in   
alphabetical order by spell name. 
Spell  Chains:  Some  spells  reference  other  spells  that  they  are  
based  upon.  (For  instance,  cure  light  wounds  is  the  spell  upon  which  
all  other  cure  spells  are  based,  and  lesser  planar  ally  is  the  spell  upon  
which planar ally and greater planar ally are based.) Only information 
about  a  spell  elsewhere  in  the  spell  chain  that  is  different  from  the  
base  spell  is  covered  in  the  spell  being  described.  Spell  description  
entries and descriptive text that are the same as the base spell are not 
repeated. 
Order  of  Presentation:  In  the  spell  lists  and  the  spell  descrip-
tions that follow them, the spells are presented in alphabetical order 
by  name  except  for  those  belonging  to  certain  spell  chains.  When  a  
spell’s   name   begins   with   “lesser,”   “greater,”   or   “mass,”   the   spell   
description is alphabetized under the second word of the spell name 
instead.  For  instance,  the  spell  mass  suggestion  is  entered  in  the  lists  
as “Suggestion, Mass,” and its description can be found immediately 
following the description for suggestion. 
Hit   Dice:   The   term   “Hit   Dice”   is   used   synonymously   with   
“character  levels”  for  effects  that  affect  a  number  of  Hit  Dice  of  
creatures.  Creatures  with  Hit  Dice  only  from  their  race,  not  from  
classes, have character levels equal to their Hit Dice. 
Caster  Level:  A  spell’s  power  often  depends  on  caster  level,  
which is defined as the caster’s class level for the purpose of casting a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular spell. A creature with no classes has a caster level equal 
to its Hit Dice unless otherwise specified. The word “level” in the 
spell lists that follow always refers to caster level. 
Spell Effects and Conditions: If a spell causes its subject or 
subjects  to  be  affected  by  one  or  more  conditions  (such  as  
blinded, incorporeal, invisible, or stunned), refer to the glossary 
for  details  of  how  that  condition  affects  the  subject.  Chapter  8  
of  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  has  more  information  on  the  
various conditions. 
Creatures   and   Characters:   The   words   “creature”   and   
“character” are used synonymously in the spell descriptions. 
 
BARD SPELLS 
 
0-LEVEL BARD SPELLS (CANTRIPS) 
Dancing Lights: Creates torches or other lights. 
Daze:   Humanoid   creature   of   4   HD   or   less   loses   next   
action. 
Detect Magic: Detects spells and magic items within 
60 ft. 
Flare: Dazzles one creature (–1 on attack rolls). 
Ghost Sound: Figment sounds. 
Know Direction: You discern north. 
Light: Object shines like a torch. 
Lullaby: Makes subject drowsy; –5 on Spot and Listen checks, 
–2 on Will saves against sleep. 
Mage Hand: 5-pound telekinesis. 
Mending: Makes minor repairs on an object. 
181

 
 
182 
Message: Whispered conversation at distance. 
Open/Close: Opens or closes small or light things. 
Prestidigitation: Performs minor tricks. 
Read Magic: Read scrolls and spellbooks. 
Resistance: Subject gains +1 on saving throws. 
Summon  Instrument:  Summons  one  instrument  of  the  caster’s  
choice. 
 
1ST-LEVEL BARD SPELLS 
Alarm: Wards an area for 2 hours/level. 
Animate Rope: Makes a rope move at your command. 
Cause Fear: One creature of 5 HD or less flees for 1d4 rounds. 
Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 
Comprehend  Languages:  You  understand  all  spoken  and  written  
languages. 
Cure Light Wounds: Cures 1d8 damage +1/level (max +5). 
Detect Secret Doors: Reveals hidden doors within 60 ft. 
Disguise Self: Changes your appearance. 
Erase: Mundane or magical writing vanishes. 
Expeditious Retreat: Your speed increases by 30 ft. 
Feather Fall: Objects or creatures fall slowly. 
Grease: Makes 10-ft. square or one object slippery. 
Hypnotism: Fascinates 2d4 HD of creatures. 
Identify 
M
: Determines properties of magic item. 
Lesser Confusion: One creature is confused for 1 round. 
Magic Mouth 
M
: Speaks once when triggered. 
Nystul’s Magic Aura: Alters object’s magic aura. 
Obscure Object: Masks object against scrying. 
Remove  Fear:  Suppresses  fear  or  gives  +4  on  saves  against  fear  for  
one subject + one per four levels. 
Silent Image: Creates minor illusion of your design. 
Sleep: Puts 4 HD of creatures into magical slumber. 
Summon Monster I: Calls extraplanar creature to fight for you. 
Tasha’s  Hideous  Laughter:  Subject  loses  actions  for  1  round/  
level. 
Undetectable Alignment: Conceals alignment for 24 hours. 
Unseen Servant: Invisible force obeys your commands. 
Ventriloquism: Throws voice for 1 min./level. 
 
2ND-LEVEL BARD SPELLS 
Alter Self: Assume form of a similar creature. 
Animal Messenger: Sends a Tiny animal to a specific place. 
Animal Trance: Fascinates 2d6 HD of animals. 
Blindness/Deafness: Makes subject blind or deaf. 
Blur: Attacks miss subject 20% of the time. 
Calm Emotions: Calms creatures, negating emotion effects. 
Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 min./level. 
Cure Moderate Wounds: Cures 2d8 damage +1/level (max +10). 
Darkness: 20-ft. radius of supernatural shadow. 
Daze Monster: Living creature of 6 HD or less loses next action. 
Delay Poison: Stops poison from harming subject for 1 hour/ level. 
Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. 
Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 to Cha for 1 min./level. 
Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 
Fox’s Cunning: Subject gains +4 to Int for 1 min./level. 
Glitterdust: Blinds creatures, outlines invisible creatures. 
Heroism: Gives +2 on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. 
Hold Person: Paralyzes one humanoid for 1 round/level. 
Hypnotic Pattern: Fascinates (2d4 + level) HD of creatures. 
Invisibility: Subject is invisible for 1 min./level or until it attacks. 
Locate Object: Senses direction toward object (specific or type). 
Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. 
Mirror  Image:  Creates  decoy  duplicates  of  you  (1d4  +1  per  three  
levels, max 8). 
Misdirection: Misleads divinations for one creature or object. 
Pyrotechnics: Turns fire into blinding light or choking smoke. 
Rage: Gives +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 
Scare: Panics creatures of less than 6 HD. 
Shatter: Sonic vibration damages objects or crystalline creatures. 
Silence: Negates sound in 15-ft. radius. 
Sound Burst: Deals 1d8 sonic damage to subjects; may stun them. 
Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 
Summon Monster II: Calls extraplanar creature to fight for you. 
Summon Swarm: Summons swarm of bats, rats, or spiders. 
Tongues: Speak any language. 
Whispering Wind: Sends a short message 1 mile/level. 
 
3RD-LEVEL BARD SPELLS 
Blink: You randomly vanish and reappear for 1 round/level. 
Charm Monster: Makes monster believe it is your ally. 
Clairaudience/Clairvoyance:   Hear   or   see   at   a   distance   for   1   
min./level. 
Confusion: Subjects behave oddly for 1 round/level. 
Crushing  Despair:  Subjects  take  –2  on  attack  rolls,  damage  rolls,  
saves, and checks. 
Cure Serious Wounds: Cures 3d8 damage +1/level (max +15). 
Daylight: 60-ft. radius of bright light. 
Deep Slumber: Puts 10 HD of creatures to sleep. 
Dispel Magic: Cancels magical spells and effects. 
Displacement: Attacks miss subject 50%. 
Fear: Subjects within cone flee for 1 round/level. 
Gaseous Form: Subject becomes insubstantial and can fly slowly. 
Geas, Lesser: Commands subject of 7 HD or less. 
Glibness:  You  gain  +30  bonus  on  Bluff  checks,  and  your  lies  can  
escape magical discernment. 
Good  Hope:  Subjects  gain  +2  on  attack  rolls,  damage  rolls,  saves,  
and checks. 
Haste:  One  creature/level  moves  faster,  +1  on  attack  rolls,  AC,  and  
Reflex saves. 
Illusory Script 
M
: Only intended reader can decipher. 
Invisibility Sphere: Makes everyone within 10 ft. invisible. 
Leomund’s Tiny Hut: Creates shelter for ten creatures. 
Major Image: As silent image, plus sound, smell and thermal effects. 
Phantom Steed: Magic horse appears for 1 hour/level. 
Remove Curse: Frees object or person from curse. 
Scrying 
F
: Spies on subject from a distance. 
Sculpt Sound: Creates new sounds or changes existing ones. 
Secret Page: Changes one page to hide its real content. 
See Invisibility: Reveals invisible creatures or objects. 
Sepia Snake Sigil 
M
: Creates text symbol that immobilizes reader. 
Slow: One subject/level takes only one action/round, –2 to AC and 
attack rolls. 
Speak with Animals: You can communicate with animals. 
Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to fight for you. 
 
4TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS 
Break   Enchantment:   Frees   subjects   from   enchantments,   alter-
ations, curses, and petrification. 
Cure Critical Wounds: Cures 4d8 damage +1/level (max +20). 
Detect Scrying: Alerts you of magical eavesdropping. 
Dimension Door: Teleports you short distance. 
Dominate Person: Controls humanoid telepathically. 
Freedom  of  Movement:  Subject  moves  normally  despite  imped-
iments. 
Hallucinatory   Terrain:   Makes   one   type   of   terrain   appear   like   
another (field into forest, or the like). 
Hold Monster: As hold person, but any creature. 
Invisibility,  Greater:  As  invisibility, but subject can attack and stay 
invisible. 