CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
105
unpunished. Alhandra, a paladin who fights evil without mercy and 
protects the innocent without hesitation, is lawful good. 
Lawful good is the best alignment you can be because it combines 
honor and compassion. 
Neutral  Good,  “Benefactor”:  A  neutral  good  character  does  the  
best that a good person can do. He is devoted to helping others. He 
works   with   kings   and   magistrates   
but does not feel beholden to them. 
Jozan,   a   cleric   who   helps   others   
according to their needs, is neutral 
good. 
Neutral    good    is    the    best    
alignment  you  can  be  because  it  
means    doing    what    is    good    
without    bias    for    or    against    
order. 
Chaotic   Good,   “Rebel”:   A   
chaotic  good  character  acts  
as   his   conscience   directs   
him  with  little  regard  for  
what others expect of him. 
He   makes   his   own   way,   
but       he’s       kind       and       
benevolent.   He   believes   in   
goodness   and   right   but   has   
little     use     for     laws     and     
regulations.  He  hates  it  when  
people  try  to  intimidate  others  
and   tell   them   what   to   do.   He   
follows   his   own   moral   compass,   
which,    although    good,    may    not    
agree with that of society. Soverliss, 
a ranger who waylays the evil baron’s 
tax collectors, is chaotic good. 
Chaotic  good  is  the  best  alignment  you  
can be because it combines a good heart with a free 
spirit. 
Lawful    Neutral,    “Judge”:    A    lawful    neutral    
character  acts  as  law,  tradition,  or  a  personal  code  
directs   her.   Order   and   organization   are   para-
mount   to   her.   She   may   believe   in   personal   
order  and  live  by  a  code  or  standard,  or  she  
may  believe  in  order  for  all  and  favor  a  
strong,  organized  government.  Ember,  a  
monk  who  follows  her  discipline  with-
out being swayed either by the demands 
of  those  in  need  or  by  the  temptations  of  
evil, is lawful neutral. 
Lawful  neutral  is  the  best  alignment  
you  can  be  because  it  means  you  are  
reliable  and  honorable  without  being  
a zealot. 
Neutral,  “Undecided”:  A  neutral  character  does  what  
seems  to  be  a  good  idea.  She  doesn’t  feel  strongly  one  way  or  the  
other  when  it  comes  to  good  vs.  evil  or  law  vs.  chaos.  Most  neutral  
characters  exhibit  a  lack  of  conviction  or  bias  rather  than  a  com-
mitment to neutrality. Such a character thinks of good as better than 
evil—after  all,  she  would  rather  have  good  neighbors  and  rulers  
than  evil  ones.  Still,  she’s  not  personally  committed  to  upholding  
good in any abstract or universal way. Mialee, a wizard who devotes 
herself  to  her  art  and  is  bored  by  the  semantics  of  moral  debate,  is  
neutral. 
Some  neutral  characters,  on  the  other  hand,  commit  themselves  
philosophically  to  neutrality.  They  see  good,  evil,  law,  and  chaos  as  
prejudices  and  dangerous  extremes.  They  advocate  the  middle  way  
of neutrality as the best, most balanced road in the long run. 
Neutral is the best alignment you can be because it means you act 
naturally, without prejudice or compulsion. 
Chaotic   Neutral,   “Free   Spirit”:   A   chaotic   neutral   character   
follows his whims. He is an individualist first and last. He values his 
own  liberty  but  doesn’t  strive  to  protect  others’  freedom.  He  avoids  
authority,  resents  restrictions,  and  challenges  traditions.  A  chaotic  
neutral character does not intentionally disrupt organizations as part 
of a campaign of anarchy. To do so, he would have to be motivated 
either  by  good  (and  a  desire  to  
liberate  others)  or  evil  (and  a  
desire  to  make  those  different  
from      himself      suffer).      A      
chaotic neutral character may 
be    unpredictable,    but    his    
behavior     is     not     totally     
random.   He   is   not   as   
likely    to    jump    off    a    
bridge   as   to   cross   it.   
Gimble,    a    bard    who    
wanders  the  land  living  
by   his   wits,   is   chaotic   
neutral. 
Chaotic   neutral   is   the   
best  alignment  you  can  be  because  
it   represents   true   freedom   from   
both society’s restrictions and a do-
gooder’s zeal. 
Lawful   Evil,   “Dominator”:   A   
lawful  evil  villain  methodically  takes  
what  he  wants  within  the  limits  of  his  
code  of  conduct  without  regard  for  
whom   it   hurts.   He   cares   about   
tradition,   loyalty,   and   order   but   not   
about   freedom,   dignity,   or   life.   He   
plays  by  the  rules  but  without  mercy  
or compassion. He is comfortable in a 
hierarchy and would like to rule, but is 
willing to serve. He condemns others 
not  according  to  their  actions  but  
according     to     race,     religion,     
homeland,  or  social  rank.  He  
is   loath   to   break   laws   or   
promises.    This    reluctance    
comes  partly  from  his  nature  
and      partly      because      he      
depends on order to protect 
himself   from   those   who   
oppose    him    on    moral    
grounds. 
Some      lawful      evil      
villains   have   particular   
taboos,     such     as     not     
killing  in  cold  blood  (but  having  underlings  do  it)  or  not  letting  
children come to harm (if it can be helped). They imagine that these 
compunctions  put  them  above  unprincipled  villains.  The  scheming  
baron who expands his power and exploits his people is lawful evil. 
Some  lawful  evil  people  and  creatures  commit  themselves  to  evil  
with a zeal like that of a crusader committed to good. Beyond being 
willing  to  hurt  others  for  their  own  ends,  they  take  pleasure  in  
spreading  evil  as  an  end  unto  itself.  They  may  also  see  doing  evil  as  
part of a duty to an evil deity or master. 
Lawful evil is sometimes called “diabolical,” because devils are the 
epitome of lawful evil. 
Devis
Illus. by J. Foster 
CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
106 
Lawful evil is the most dangerous alignment because it represents 
methodical, intentional, and frequently successful evil. 
Neutral  Evil,  “Malefactor”:  A  neutral  evil  villain  does  whatever  
she  can  get  away  with.  She  is  out  for  herself,  pure  and  simple.  She  
sheds  no  tears  for  those  she  kills,  whether  for  profit,  sport,  or  
convenience.  She  has  no  love  of  order  and  holds  no  illusion  that  
following  laws,  traditions,  or  codes  would  make  her  any  better  or  
more noble. On the other hand, she doesn’t have the restless nature 
or  love  of  conflict  that  a  chaotic  evil  villain  has.  The  criminal  who  
robs and murders to get what she wants is neutral evil. 
Some neutral evil villains hold up evil as an ideal, committing evil 
for its own sake. Most often, such villains are devoted to evil deities 
or secret societies. 
Neutral  evil  is  the  most  dangerous  alignment  because  it  repre-
sents pure evil without honor and without variation. 
Chaotic  Evil,  “Destroyer”:  A  chaotic  evil  character  does  what-
ever his greed, hatred, and lust for destruction drive him to do. He is 
hot-tempered, vicious, arbitrarily violent, and unpredictable. If he is 
simply out for whatever he can get, he is ruthless and brutal. If he is 
committed   to   the   spread   of   evil   and   chaos,   he   is   even   worse.   
Thankfully,  his  plans  are  haphazard,  and  any  groups  he  joins  or  
forms  are  poorly  organized.  Typically,  chaotic  evil  people  can  be  
made  to  work  together  only  by  force,  and  their  leader  lasts  only  as  
long  as  he  can  thwart  attempts  to  topple  or  assassinate  him.  The  
demented  sorcerer  pursuing  mad  schemes  of  vengeance  and  havoc  
is chaotic evil. 
Chaotic  evil  is  sometimes  called  “demonic”  because  demons  are  
the epitome of chaotic evil. 
Chaotic    evil    is    the    most    dangerous    alignment    because    it    
represents the destruction not only of beauty and life but also of the 
order on which beauty and life depend. 
 
RELIGION 
The gods are many. A few, such as Pelor (god of the sun), have grand 
temples  that  sponsor  mighty  processions  through  the  streets  on  
high  holy  days.  Others,  such  as  Erythnul  (god  of  slaughter),  have  
temples  only  in  hidden  places  or  evil  lands.  While  the  gods  most  
strongly  make  their  presence  felt  through  their  clerics,  they  also  
have  lay  followers  who  more  or  less  attempt  to  live  up  to  their  
deities’ standards. The typical person has a deity whom he considers 
to be his patron. Still, it is only prudent to be respectful toward and 
even pray to other deities when the time is right. Before setting out 
on  a  journey,  a  follower  of  Pelor  might  leave  a  small  sacrifice  at  a  
wayside shrine to Fharlanghn (god of roads) to improve his chances 
of  having  a  safe  journey.  As  long  as  one’s  own  deity  is  not  at  odds  
with  the  others  in  such  an  act  of  piety,  such  simple  practices  are  
common.  In  times  of  tribulation,  however,  some  people  recite  dark  
prayers  to  evil  deities.  Such  prayers  are  best  muttered  under  one’s  
breath, lest others overhear. 
Deities rule the various aspects of human existence: good and evil, 
law  and  chaos,  life  and  death,  knowledge  and  nature.  In  addition,  
various  nonhuman  races  have  racial  deities  of  their  own  (see  Table  
6–2: Deities by Race). A character may not be a cleric of a racial deity 
unless  he  is  of  the  right  race,  but  he  may  worship  such  a  deity  and  
live according to that deity’s guidance. For a deity who is not tied to 
a particular race (such as Pelor), a cleric’s race is not an issue. 
Deities  of  certain  monster  types  are  identified  in  the  Monster 
Manual. Many more deities than those described here or mentioned 
in the Monster Manual also exist. 
Your  character  may  or  may  not  have  a  patron  deity.  If  you  want  
her  to  have  one,  consider  first  the  deities  most  appropriate  to  the  
character’s race, class, and alignment (see Table 6–2: Deities by Race 
and Table 6–3: Deities by Class). If a cleric selects a deity, which one 
he  selects  influences  his  capabilities.  Players  with  cleric  characters  
should  refer  to  Deity,  Domains,  and  Domain  Spells,  page  32,  before  
picking   a   deity,   though   the   information   below   describing   the   
various gods and goddesses can help them make a decision. 
 
Table 6–2: Deities by Race 
Race               Deities               
Human By class and alignment 
Dwarf Moradin or by class and alignment 
Elf Corellon Larethian, Ehlonna, or by class and alignment 
Gnome Garl Glittergold, Ehlonna, or by class and alignment 
Half-elf Corellon Larethian, Ehlonna, or by class and alignment 
Half-orc Gruumsh or by class and alignment 
Halfling Yondalla, Ehlonna, or by class and alignment 
 
Table 6–3: Deities by Class 
Class                       Deities                       (Alignment)                       
Barbarian Kord (CG), Obad-Hai (N), Erythnul (CE) 
Bard Pelor (NG), Fharlanghn (N), Olidammara (CN) 
Cleric                      Any                      
Druid                      Obad-Hai                      (N)                      
Fighter Heironeous (LG), Kord (CG), St. Cuthbert (LN), 
 Hextor (LE), Erythnul (CE) 
Illusionist               Boccob               (N)               
Necromancer Wee Jas (LN), Nerull (NE) 
Monk Heironeous (LG), St. Cuthbert, (LN), Hextor (LE) 
Paladin                   Heironeous                   (LG)                   
Ranger Ehlonna (NG), Obad-Hai (N) 
Rogue Olidammara (CN), Nerull (NE), Vecna (NE), 
                                Erythnul                                (CE)                                
Sorcerer Wee Jas (LN), Boccob (N), Vecna (NE) 
Wizard Wee Jas (LN), Boccob (N), Vecna (NE) 
 
DEITIES 
Across  the  world,  people  and  creatures  worship  a  great  number  of  
varied  deities.  Those  described  here  are  the  deities  most  often  wor-
shiped  among  the  common  races,  by  adventurers,  and  by  villains.  
Each  entry  includes  the  deity’s  name,  role,  alignment,  titles  he  or  
she  is  known  by,  and  general  description.  These  deities’  holy  (or  
unholy)  symbols  are  shown  accompanying  their  descriptions.  (See  
Table  3–7:  Deities,  page  32,  for  a  summary  of  the  most  common  
deities,  their  alignments,  the  domains  they  are  associated  with,  and  
their typical worshipers.) 
 
Boccob 
The god of magic, Boccob, is neutral. His titles 
include  the  Uncaring,  Lord  of  All  Magics,  
and  Archmage  of  the  Deities.  Boccob  
is a distant deity who promotes no 
special  agenda  in  the  world  of  
mortals.  As  a  god  of  magic  and  
knowledge,   he   is   worshiped   by   
wizards,  sorcerers,  and  sages.  The  
domains  he  is  associated  with  are  
Knowledge,   Magic,   and   Trickery.   
The     quarterstaff     is     his     favored     
weapon. 
 
Corellon Larethian 
The   god   of   elves,   Corellon   Larethian,   is   
chaotic  good.  He  is  known  as  the  Creator  
of the Elves, the Protector, Protector and 
Preserver   of   Life,   and   Ruler   of   All   
Elves.  Corellon  Larethian  is  the  cre-
ator  and  protector  of  the  elf  race.  He  
governs   those   things   held   in   highest   
esteem   among   elves,   such   as   magic,   
music, arts, crafts, poetry, and warfare. Elves, 
half-elves,  and  bards  worship  him.  The  domains  
Illus. by S. Wood 
CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
107
he is associated with are Chaos, Good, Protection, and War. His favo-
red  weapon  is  the  longsword.  Gruumsh  is  his  nemesis,  and  it  is  be-
cause of Corellon’s battle prowess that Gruumsh is called “One-Eye.” 
 
Ehlonna 
Ehlonna,  the  goddess  of  the  woodlands,  is  neutral  good.  Her  most  
commonly  encountered  title  is  Ehlonna  of  
the   Forests.   Ehlonna   watches   over   all   
good   people   who   live   in   the   
forest,  love  the  woodlands,  or  
make  their  livelihood  there.  She  
is  pictured  sometimes  as  an  elf  and  
sometimes    as    a    human.    She    is    
especially   close   to   elves,   gnomes,   
half-elves,  and  halflings.  She  is  also  
worshiped   by   rangers   and   some   
druids.      The      domains      she      is      
associated  with  are  Animal,  Good,  
Plant, and Sun. Her favored weapon 
is the longbow. 
 
Erythnul 
The  god  of  slaughter,  Erythnul,  is  chaotic  
evil.  His  title  is  the  Many.  Erythnul  
delights  in  panic  and  slaughter.  In  
civilized     lands,     his     followers     
(including  evil  fighters,  barba-
rians,  and  rogues)  form  small,  
criminal cults. In savage lands, 
evil    barbarians,    gnolls,    bug-
bears, ogres, and trolls common-
ly  worship  him.  The  domains  he  
is  associated  with  are  Chaos,  Evil,  
Trickery, and War. His favored weapon 
is a morningstar with a blunt stone head. 
 
Fharlanghn 
Fharlanghn,  the  god  of  roads,  is  neutral.  His  
title  is  Dweller  on  the  Horizon.  Fhar-
langhn’s     wayside     shrines     are     
common  on  well-used  roads,  for  
he  is  the  god  of  travel,  roads,  
distance,  and  horizons.  Bards,  
other  wandering  adventurers,  
and    merchants    favor    Fhar-
langhn.    The    domains    he    is    
associated   with   are   Luck,   Pro-
tection,   and   Travel.   The   quarter-
staff is his favored weapon. 
 
Garl Glittergold 
The god of gnomes, Garl Glittergold, is neutral good. He is known as 
the   Joker,   the   Watchful   Protector,   the   Priceless   Gem,   and   the   
Sparkling Wit. Garl Glittergold discovered the gnomes and led them 
into  the  world.  Since  then,  he  has  been  their  protector.  He  governs  
humor,  wit,  gemcutting,  and  jewelrymaking.  The  domains  he  is  
associated  with  are  Good,  Protection,  and  Trickery.  Garl’s  favored  
weapon  is  the  battleaxe.  He  is  
renowned  for  the  jokes  and  
pranks   he   pulls   on   other   
deities,  though  not  all  his  
victims laugh off his jests. 
Garl   once   collapsed   the   
cavern   of   Kurtulmak,   the   
god   of   the   kobolds.   Since   
then, the two deities have been 
sworn enemies. 
Gruumsh 
Gruumsh,  chief  god  of  the  orcs,  is  chaotic  
evil.  His  titles  are  One-Eye  and  He--
Who-Never-Sleeps.          Gruumsh          
calls   on   his   followers   to   be   
strong,  to  cull  the  weak  from  
their numbers, and to take all 
the   territory   that   Gruumsh   
thinks     is     rightfully     theirs     
(which   is   almost   everything).   
The   domains   he   is   associated   
with  are  Chaos,  Evil,  Strength,  and  
War.  Gruumsh’s  favored  weapon  is  the  
spear.  He  harbors  a  special  hatred  for  Corel-
lon  Larethian,  Moradin,  and  their  followers.  In  ages  past,  Corellon  
Larethian put out Gruumsh’s left eye in a fight. 
 
Heironeous 
The  god  of  valor,  Heironeous,  is  lawful  good.  His  
title  is  the  Invincible.  Heironeous  promotes  justice,  
valor,  chivalry,  and  honor.  The  domains  he  is  associ-
ated   with   are   Good,   Law,   and   War.   His   favored   
weapon  is  the  longsword,  and  he  is  worshiped  by  
paladins, good fighters, and good monks. His archen-
emy is Hextor, his half-brother. 
 
Hextor 
The  god  of  tyranny,  Hextor,  is  lawful  evil.  His  
titles  are  Champion  of  Evil,  Herald  of  Hell,  and  
Scourge  of  Battle.  Hextor  is  the  six-armed  god  of  
war,  conflict,  and  destruction.  Hextor’s  worshipers  
include  evil  fighters  and  monks.  The  domains  he  is  
associated with are Destruction, Evil, Law, and War. His 
favored  weapon  is  the  flail.  He  sends  his  followers  to  
commit evil, and their special purpose is to overthrow 
the     followers     of     his     half-brother     Heironeous     
wherever they are found. 
 
Kord 
Kord,  the  god  of  strength,  is  chaotic  
good.  He  is  known  as  the  Brawler.  
Kord   is   the   patron   of   athletes,   
especially    wrestlers.    His    wor-
shipers   include   good   fighters,   
barbarians,     and     rogues.     The     
domains he is associated with are 
Chaos,  Good,  Luck,  and  Strength.  
Kord’s    favored    weapon    is    the    
greatsword. 
 
Moradin 
The god of dwarves, Moradin, is lawful good. 
His   titles   include   the   Soul   Forger,   
Dwarffather,  the  All-Father,  and  the  
Creator.    Moradin    forged    the    first    
dwarves  out  of  metal  and  gems  
and  breathed  life  into  them.  He  
governs  the  arts  and  sciences  of  
the  dwarves:  smithing,  metalworking,  
engineering,  and  war.  The  domains  he  
is  associated  with  are  Earth,  Good,  
Law,   and   Protection.   His   favored   
weapon is the warhammer. 
 
 
Illus. by S. Wood 
CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
108 
Nerull 
The  god  of  death,  Nerull,  is  neutral  evil.  
He is known as the Reaper, the Foe of 
All  Good,  Hater  of  Life,  Bringer  of  
Darkness,  King  of  All  Gloom,  and  
Reaper of Flesh. Nerull is the patron 
of     those     who     seek     the     
greatest  evil  for  their  own  
enjoyment     or     gain.     The     
domains he is associated with 
are  Death,  Evil,  and  Trickery.  
His    worshipers,    who    include    evil    
necromancers  and  rogues,  depict  him  
as   an   almost   skeletal   cloaked   figure   
who bears a scythe, his favored weapon. 
 
Obad-Hai 
Obad-Hai,  the  god  of  nature,  is  neutral.  
He  is  known  as  the  Shalm.  Obad-Hai  
rules   nature   and   the   wilderness,   
and he is a friend to all who live 
in     harmony     with     the     
natural  world.  Barbarians,  
rangers,   and   druids   some-
times   worship   him.   The   
domains   he   is   associated   
with   are   Air,   Animal,   Earth,   
Fire,  Plant,  and  Water.  Because  
Obad-Hai     strictly     adheres     to     
neutrality,  he  is  a  rival  of  Ehlonna.  
Obad-Hai    plays    a    shalm    (a    
double-reed   woodwind   musical   
instrument,  also  spelled  “shawm”)  and  
takes  his  title  from  this  instrument.  His  
favored weapon is the quarterstaff. 
 
Olidammara 
The  god  of  rogues,  Olidammara,  is  
chaotic   neutral.   His   title   is   the   
Laughing      Rogue.      Olidammara      
delights   in   wine,   women,   and   
song.  He  is  a  vagabond,  a  prank-
ster,  and  a  master  of  disguise.  His  
temples  are  few,  but  many  people  are  
willing   to   raise   a   glass   in   his   honor.   
Rogues  and  bards  are  frequently  among  
his  worshipers.  The  domains  he  is  associ-
ated  with  are  Chaos,  Luck,  and  Trickery.  The  
rapier is his favored weapon. 
 
Pelor 
Pelor,  god  of  the  sun,  is  neutral  good.  
His  title  is  the  Shining  One.  Pelor  is  
the  creator  of  many  good  things,  a  
supporter  of  those  in  need,  and  
an  adversary  of  all  that  is  evil.  
He   is   the   most   commonly   
worshiped      deity      among      
ordinary   humans,   and   his   
priests    are    well    received    
wherever  they  go.  Rangers  and  
bards     are     found     among     his     
worshipers.     The     domains     he     is     
associated     with     are     Good,     Healing,     
Strength,  and  Sun.  The  mace  is  his  favored  
weapon. 
 
St. Cuthbert 
The  god  of  retribution,  St.  Cuthbert,  is  
lawful  neutral.  He  is  known  as  St.  
Cuthbert  of  the  Cudgel.  St.  Cuth-
bert   exacts   revenge   and   just   
punishment    on    those    who    
transgress    the    law.    Because    
evil  creatures  more  commonly  
and flagrantly violate laws than 
good  creatures  do,  St.  Cuthbert  
favors good over evil, though he is 
not good himself. (His clerics cannot 
be  evil.)  The  domains  he  is  associated  
with  are  Destruction,  Law,  Protection,  and  
Strength. His favored weapon is the mace. 
 
Vecna 
Vecna, the god of secrets, is neutral evil. He 
is    known    as    the    Maimed    Lord,    the    
Whispered  One,  and  the  Master  of  All  
That  Is  Secret  and  Hidden.  Vecna  rules  
that which is not meant to be known and 
that  which  people  wish  to  keep  secret.  
The  domains  he  is  associated  with  are  Evil,  
Knowledge,  and  Magic.  He  usually  appears  
as a lich who is missing his left hand and left 
eye. He lost his hand and eye in a fight with his 
traitorous lieutenant, Kas. Vecna’s favored weapon 
is the dagger. 
 
Wee Jas 
Wee Jas, the goddess of death and magic, is 
lawful  neutral.  Her  titles  are  Witch  
Goddess,   Ruby   Sorceress,   Stern   
Lady,    and    Death’s    Guardian.    
Wee  Jas  is  a  demanding  god-
dess   who   expects   obedience   
from  her  followers.  Her  tem-
ples  are  few  and  far  between,  
but  she  counts  many  powerful  
sorcerers and wizards (especially 
necromancers)   among   her   wor-
shipers.  The  domains  she  is  associ-
ated with are Death, Law, and Magic. Her 
favored weapon is the dagger. 
 
Yondalla 
The  goddess  of  halflings,  Yondalla,  is  lawful  
good.  Her  titles  include  the  Protector  and  
Provider, the Nurturing Matriarch, and the 
Blessed  One.  Yondalla  is  the  creator  
and protector of the halfling race. She 
espouses  harmony  within  the  halfling  
race  and  stalwart  defense  against  their  
enemies.   Her   followers   hope   to   lead   
safe,  prosperous  lives  by  following  her  
guidance.  The  domains  she  is  associated  
with  are  Good,  Law,  and  Protection.  The  
short sword is her favored weapon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illus. by S. Wood 
CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
109
VITAL STATISTICS 
This  section  offers  advice  as  you  determine  your  character’s  name,  
gender,  age,  height,  and  weight.  Start  with  some  idea  of  your  char-
acter’s background and personality, and use that idea to help you add 
the details that bring your character to life. 
 
NAME 
Invent  or  choose  a  name  that  fits  your  character’s  race  and  class.  
Chapter  2:  Races  contains  some  examples  of  elf,  dwarf,  halfling,  
gnome, and orc names (and thus half-elf and half-orc names, too). A 
name  is  a  great  way  for  you  to  start  thinking  about  your  character’s  
background.  For  instance,  a  dwarf’s  name  might  be  the  name  of  a  
great dwarven hero, and your character may be striving to live up to 
his  name.  Alternatively,  the  name  could  be  that  of  an  infamous  
coward,  and  the  character  could  be  bent  on  proving  that  she  is  not  
like her namesake. 
 
GENDER 
Your character can be either male or female. 
 
AGE 
You  can  choose  or  randomly  generate  your  character’s  age.  If  you  
choose  it,  it  must  be  at  least  the  minimum  age  for  the  character’s  
race   and   class   (see   Table   6–4:   Random   Starting   Ages).   Your   
character’s  minimum  starting  age  is  the  adulthood  age  of  his  or  her  
race plus the number of dice indicated in the entry corresponding to 
the  character’s  race  and  class  on  Table  6–4:  Random  Starting  Ages.  
For example, an elf ranger must be at least 116 years old (adulthood 
age 110 plus 6, because the entry for an elf ranger is +6d6). 
Alternatively,  refer  to  Table  6–4:  Random  Starting  Ages  and  roll  
dice  to  determine  how  old  your  character  is.  An  elf  ranger’s  ran-
domly generated starting age, for example, is 110+6d6 years. 
 
Table 6–4: Random Starting Ages 
                                                                                                Bard                                Cleric                                
                                                                Barbarian                                Fighter                                Druid                                
                                                                Rogue                                Paladin                                Monk                                
Race               Adulthood               Sorcerer               Ranger               Wizard 
Human              15              years                +1d4              +1d6              +2d6              
Dwarf               40              years                +3d6              +5d6              +7d6              
Elf                    110                    years                    +4d6                    +6d6                    +10d6                    
Gnome              40              years                +4d6              +6d6              +9d6              
Half-elf              20              years                +1d6              +2d6              +3d6              
Half-orc              14              years                +1d4              +1d6              +2d6              
Halfling              20              years                +2d4              +3d6              +4d6 
     
With  age,  a  character’s  physical  ability  scores  decrease  and  his  or  
her mental ability scores increase (see Table 6–5: Aging Effects). The 
effects   of   each   aging   step   are   cumulative.   However,   none   of   a   
character’s ability scores can be reduced below 1 in this way. 
For example, when a human reaches 35 years of age, his Strength, 
Dexterity,  and  Constitution  scores  each  drop  1  point,  while  his  
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores each increase by 1 point. 
When  he  becomes  53  years  old,  his  physical  abilities  all  drop  an  
additional  2  points,  while  his  mental  ability  scores  increase  by  1  
again.  So  far  he  has  lost  a  total  of  3  points  from  his  Strength,  
Constitution,  and  Dexterity  scores  and  gained  a  total  of  2  points  to  
his   Wisdom,   Intelligence,   and   Charisma   scores   because   of   the   
effects of aging. 
 
 
 
 
When a character reaches venerable age, the DM secretly rolls his 
or  her  maximum  age,  which  is  the  number  from  the  Venerable  
column  on  Table  6–5:  Aging  Effects  plus  the  result  of  the  dice  roll  
indicated  on  the  Maximum  Age  column  on  that  table,  and  records  
the result, which the player does not know. A character who reaches 
his  or  her  maximum  age  dies  of  old  age  at  some  time  during  the  
following year, as determined by the DM. 
The  maximum  ages  are  for  player  characters.  Most  people  in  the  
world  at  large  die  from  pestilence,  accidents,  infections,  or  violence  
before getting to venerable age. 
 
Table 6–5: Aging Effects 
                                                                                                                                Maximum                                
Race              Middle              Age
1
             Old
2
          Venerable
3
               Age               
Human 35 years 53 years 70 years +2d20 years 
Dwarf 125 years 188 years 250 years +2d% years 
Elf 175 years 263 years 350 years +4d% years 
Gnome 100 years 150 years 200 years +3d% years 
Half-elf 62 years 93 years 125 years +3d20 years 
Half-orc 30 years 45 years 60 years +2d10 years 
Halfling 50 years 75 years 100 years +5d20 years 
1 At middle age, –1 to Str, Dex, and Con; +1 to Int, Wis, and Cha. 
2 At old age, –2 to Str, Dex, and Con; +1 to Int, Wis, and Cha. 
3 At venerable age, –3 to Str, Dex, and Con; +1 to Int, Wis, and Cha. 
 
HEIGHT AND WEIGHT 
Choose  your  character’s  height  and  weight  from  the  ranges  men-
tioned  in  the  appropriate  race  description  (see  Chapter  2)  or  from  
the ranges found on Table 6–6: Random Height and Weight. Think 
about  what  your  character’s  abilities  might  say  about  his  or  her  
height  and  weight.  A  weak  but  agile  character,  she  may  be  thin.  A  
strong and tough character, she may be tall or just heavy. 
Alternatively,   roll   randomly   for   your   character’s   height   and   
weight  on  Table  6–6:  Random  Height  and  Weight.  The  dice  roll  
given  in  the  Height  Modifier  column  determines  the  character’s  
extra  height  beyond  the  base  height.  That  same  number  multiplied  
by  the  dice  roll  or  quantity  given  in  the  Weight  Modifier  column  
determines the character’s extra weight beyond the base weight. For 
example,  Tordek  (a  male  dwarf)  has  a  height  of  3  feet  9  inches  plus  
2d4 inches. Monte rolls 2d4 and gets a result of 6, so Tordek stands 4 
feet  3  inches  tall.  Then  Monte  uses  that  same  roll,  6,  and  multiplies  
it  by  2d6  pounds.  His  2d6  roll  is  9,  so  Tordek  weighs  an  extra  54  
pounds  (6  ×  9)  on  top  of  his  base  130  pounds,  for  a  total  of  184  
pounds. 
 
Table 6–6: Random Height and Weight 
                                    Base                                    Height                                    Base                                    Weight                                    
Race                            Height                            Modifier                            Weight                            Modifier                            
Human, male 4 ́ 10” +2d10 120 lb. × (2d4) lb. 
Human, female 4 ́ 5” +2d10 85 lb. × (2d4) lb. 
Dwarf, male 3 ́ 9” +2d4 130 lb. × (2d6) lb. 
Dwarf, female 3 ́ 7” +2d4 100 lb. × (2d6) lb. 
Elf, male 4 ́ 5” +2d6 85 lb. × (1d6) lb. 
Elf, female 4 ́ 5” +2d6 80 lb. × (1d6) lb. 
Gnome, male 3 ́ 0” +2d4 40 lb. × 1 lb. 
Gnome, female 2 ́ 10” +2d4 35 lb. × 1 lb. 
Half-elf, male 4 ́ 7” +2d8 100 lb. × (2d4) lb. 
Half-elf, female 4 ́ 5” +2d8 80 lb. × (2d4) lb. 
Half-orc, male 4 ́ 10” +2d12 150 lb. × (2d6) lb. 
Half-orc, female 4 ́ 5” +2d12 110 lb. × (2d6) lb. 
Halfling, male 2 ́ 8” +2d4 30 lb. × 1 lb. 
Halfling, female 2 ́ 6” +2d4 25 lb. × 1 lb.
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
110 
LOOKS, PERSONALITY, 
AND BACKGROUND 
You can detail your character to any degree you like. As you play the 
character,  you  will  probably  come  up  with  more  details  you  will  
want to add. 
 
LOOKS 
Decide  what  your  character  looks  like  using  the  descriptions  of  the  
various  races  in  Chapter  2  as  a  starting  point.  Characters  with  high  
Charisma  scores  tend  to  be  better-looking  than  those  with  low  
Charisma scores, though a character with high Charisma could have 
strange looks, giving him or her a sort of exotic beauty. 
Your character can be right- or left-handed. 
You  can  use  your  character’s  looks  to  tell  something  about  
his or her personality and background. For example: 
 Krusk  the  half-orc  is  missing  part  of  an  ear  and  bears  
many  scars  that  are  the  result  of  the  violent  life  he  
led  among  the  orcs  that  raised  him.  He  keeps  
claws and fangs from beasts he has killed on a 
necklace. 
 Alhandra   the   paladin   has   the   hand   of   
Heironeous branded on the inside of her forearm 
to show her devotion to him. 
 Hennet     the     sorcerer     wears     an     eclectic,     
makeshift  outfit  that  is  different  from  day  to  
day, suggesting his chaotic nature. 
 
PERSONALITY 
Decide  how  your  character  acts,  what  she  
likes,  what  she  wants  out  of  life,  what  scares  
her,  and  what  makes  her  angry.  Race  and  
alignment   are   good   places   to   start   when   
thinking  about  your  character’s  personality,  
but  they  are  bad  places  to  stop.  Make  your  
lawful   good   dwarf   (or   whatever)   different   
from every other lawful good dwarf. 
A   handy   trick   for   making   an   interesting   
personality for your character is including some 
sort  of  conflict  in  her  nature.  For  example,  Tordek  is  
lawful, but he’s a little greedy, too. He may be tempted to 
steal if he can justify it to himself. 
Your character’s personality can change over time. Just 
because    you    decide    some    basic    facts    about    your    
character’s  personality  upon  creation  doesn’t  mean  you  
need  to  abide  by  those  facts  as  if  they  were  holy  writ.  
Let  your  character  grow  and  evolve  the  way  real  
people do. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Decide  what  your  character’s  life  has  been  like  up  until  
now. Here are a few questions to get you thinking: 
 How did he decide to be an adventurer? 
 How did he acquire her class? A fighter, for example, might have 
been in the militia, he may come from a family of soldiers, he may 
have  trained  in  a  martial  school,  or  he  may  be  a  self-taught  
warrior. 
 How  did  he  get  his  starting  equipment?  Did  he  assemble  it  piece  
by piece over time? Was it a parting gift from a parent or mentor? 
Do any of his personal items have special significance to him? 
 What’s the worst thing that’s ever happened to him? 
 What’s the best thing that’s ever happened to him? 
 Does  he  stay  in  contact  with  his  family?  What  do  his  relatives  
think of him? 
 
CUSTOMIZING 
YOUR CHARACTER 
The  rules  for  creating  your  character  provide  a  common  ground  for  
players, but you can tweak the rules to make your character unique. 
Any substantive changes, however, must be approved by the DM. 
Race:  The  rules  for  a  character  of  a  given  race  apply  to  most  but  
not  all  people  of  that  race.  For  example,  you  could  create  a  dwarf  
descended   from   dwarven   outcasts   who   have   been   exiled   from   
dwarven society. Your dwarf would have grown up among humans. 
He  would  have  the  inborn  qualities  of  a  dwarf  (better  Constitution,  
worse     Charisma,     darkvision,     
and   resistance   to   poison   and   
spells)    but    not    the    cultural    
features    (stonecunning,    attack    
bonuses   against   goblinoids   and   
orcs,  dodge  bonus  against  giants,  
bonuses   to   Appraise   and   Craft   
checks   that   relate   to   stone   or   
metal,  fighter  as  favored  class,  and  
perhaps    even    knowledge    of    the    
dwarven      language).      You      could      
probably  talk  your  DM  into  giving  
your  character  some  special  bonuses  
to   balance   the   loss   of   the   cultural   
features. 
Class:  Some  classes  already  give  you  
plenty    of    room    to    customize    your    
character.   With   your   DM’s   approval,   
however,  you  could  change  some  of  your  
class  features.  For  instance,  if  you  want  a  
fighter  who  used  to  work  for  the  thieves  
guild  as  an  enforcer  but  who  is  now  trying  
to become a legitimate bodyguard, he could 
be  proficient  only  with  the  weapons  and  
armor available to rogues, have 4 skill points 
per level instead of 2, and access to Bluff and 
Sense  Motive  as  class  skills.  Otherwise,  he  
would be a regular fighter. 
Skills  and  Feats:  You  can  call  your  skills,  
feats, and class features whatever your character 
would call them. Lidda, the halfling rogue, talks 
about  “footpaddin’  ”  rather  than  about  “moving  
silently,”   so   her   player   writes   “Footpaddin’   ”   
down  on  her  character  sheet  to  stand  for  the  
Move  Silently  skill.  Ember,  the  monk,  calls  her  
Move Silently skill “Rice Paper Walk.” 
You  might  also  think  of  other  skills  that  your  
character  ought  to  have.  Your  DM  has  guidelines  
(in   the   Dungeon   Master’s   Guide)   for   creating   new   
skills. 
Equipment:  Your  equipment  can  look  the  way  
you  want  it  to  look  to  match  your  character’s  style.  
One  wizard’s  quarterstaff  might  be  a  plain,  straight  
length  of  wood,  while  another  wizard’s  is  gnarled,  twisted,  and  
engraved with mystic runes. 
Your  character  might  have  some  items  that  aren’t  on  the  equip-
ment lists (see Chapter 7). Agree with your DM on what a new item 
would do and how much it would cost, and then your character can 
have it. 
Sometimes  you  see  a  weapon  in  a  movie  or  read  about  one  in  a  
book, and you want your character to use that weapon. If it’s not on 
the  weapon  list  in  Chapter  7,  try  to  find  a  weapon  on  the  list  that  
seems  equivalent.  A  katana  (samurai  sword),  for  example,  is  not  on  
the  weapon  list,  but  you  could  equip  your  character  with  a  katana  
and just treat it like a masterwork bastard sword. 
Illus. by T. Lockwood 
Nerull
CHAPTER 6: 
DESCRIPTION
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
n  the  marketplace  of  a  big  city,  armorsmiths  and  weapon-
smiths  offer  a  wide  variety  of  arms  and  armor  for  those  with  
the  gold  to  buy  them.  Here  you  can  find  practical,  sturdy  
swords and perhaps a few elven blades of exceptional quality. 
Alchemists  sell  acid,  alchemist’s  fire,  and  smokesticks  for  
those who want something flashier than a trusty blade. Wizards (or, 
more  likely,  their  brokers)  even  sell  magic  scrolls,  wands,  weapons,  
and other items. 
This  chapter  covers  the  mundane  and  exotic  merchandise  that  
characters  may  want  to  purchase  and  how  to  go  about  doing  so.  
(Magic items are covered in the Dungeon Master’s Guide.) 
 
EQUIPPING A CHARACTER 
A beginning character generally has enough wealth to start out with 
the basics: some weapons, some armor suitable to his or her class (if 
any),  and  some  miscellaneous  gear.  As  the  character  undertakes  
adventures  and  amasses  loot,  he  or  she  can  afford  bigger  and  better  
gear.  At  first,  however,  the  options  are  limited  by  the  character’s  
budget. 
 
STARTING PACKAGES 
Each class has a starting package that provides default equipment (as 
well  as  default  skills,  a  default  feat,  and  so  forth).  If  you  equip  your  
character  with  the  default  equipment,  you  can  customize  these  
packages a little by swapping in some equipment of your choice for 
the  indicated  equipment.  Trades  like  this  are  fine  as  long  as  the  
value of the equipment you swap in isn’t higher than the value of the 
equipment given in the package. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EQUIPMENT A LA CARTE 
If you don’t want to take the standard package for your character 
class,     you     can     instead     purchase     weapons,     armor,     and     
miscellaneous   equipment   item   by   item.   You   begin   with   a   
random   number   of   gold   pieces   that   is   determined   by   your   
character’s class, and you decide how to spend it (see Table 7–1: 
Random   Starting   Gold).   Alternatively,   your   DM   can   assign   
average  starting  gold  for  each  character,  as  indicated  on  Table  
7–1. 
 
Table 7–1: Random Starting Gold 
Class         Amount         (average)         Class         Amount         (average)         
Barbarian  4d4 × 10 (100 gp) Paladin 6d4 × 10 (150 gp) 
Bard 4d4 × 10 (100 gp) Ranger 6d4 × 10 (150 gp) 
Cleric 5d4 × 10 (125 gp) Rogue 5d4 × 10 (125 gp) 
Druid 2d4 × 10 (50 gp) Sorcerer    3d4 × 10 (75 gp) 
Fighter 6d4 × 10 (150 gp) Wizard 3d4 × 10 (75 gp) 
Monk 5d4 (12 gp, 5 sp)
 
 
Note  that  buying  beginning  equipment  this  way  is  an  
abstraction.  Your  character  doesn’t  walk  into  a  store  with  
handfuls  of  gold  and  buy  every  item  one  by  one.  Rather,  
these  items  may  have  come  the  character’s  way  as  gifts  
from   family,   equipment   from   patrons,   gear   granted   
during  military  service,  swag  gained  through  duplicity,  
and so on. 
Assume your character owns at least one outfit of normal 
clothes. Pick any one of the following clothing outfits for free: 
artisan’s  outfit,  entertainer’s  outfit,  explorer’s  outfit,  monk’s  
outfit,  peasant’s  outfit,  scholar’s  outfit,  or  traveler’s  outfit.  
(See Clothing, page 131.) 
111

 
 
112 
AVAILABILITY 
All the items described in this chapter are assumed to be available to 
PCs with the wherewithal to buy them. Many of these items are very 
expensive  and  rare.  You  won’t  find  them  on  the  rack  at  a  store  in  a  
town.  But  a  character  with  the  coin  to  buy  an  expensive  item  can  
usually connect with a seller and get a desired item. 
If  you  want  to  buy  something  not  described  in  this  chapter,  the  
general rule is that you can buy anything that costs as much as 3,000 
gp.  Buying  a  more  expensive  item,  such  as  a  +2  longsword,  means  
either  going  to  a  big  city  where  rare  things  are  for  sale,  making  a  
special  deal  with  someone  who  makes  or  can  provide  the  item,  or  
paying a premium price to a merchant who makes a special effort to 
get you what you want. 
Depending  on  where  in  the  fantasy  world  the  character  is,  it  
might  be  possible  to  buy  more  expensive  items  without  a  problem,  
or  it  might  be  more  difficult  to  do  so.  In  a  small  town,  for  example,  
it’s  practically  impossible  to  find  someone  who  can  make  a  suit  of  
full  plate  armor.  The  DM  determines  what  is  and  is  not  available  
depending   on   how   he   or   she   runs   the   world   and   where   the   
characters are in it. 
 
WEALTH AND MONEY 
Adventurers  are  in  the  small  group  of  people  who  regularly  buy  
things  with  coins.  Members  of  the  peasantry  trade  mostly  in  goods,  
bartering  for  what  they  need  and  paying  taxes  in  grain  and  cheese.  
Members  of  the  nobility  trade  mostly  in  legal  rights,  such  as  the  
rights  to  a  mine,  a  port,  or  farmland,  or  they  trade  in  gold  bars,  
measuring gold by the pound rather than by the coin. 
 
COINS 
The  most  common  coin  that  adventurers  use  is  the  gold  piece  (gp).  
With  1  gold  piece,  a  character  can  buy  a  belt  pouch,  50  feet  of  
hempen  rope,  or  a  goat.  A  skilled  (but  not  exceptional)  artisan  can  
earn 1 gold piece a day. The gold piece is the standard unit of meas-
ure for wealth. When merchants discuss deals that involve goods or 
services  worth  hundreds  or  thousands  of  gold  pieces,  the  trans-
actions  don’t  usually  involve  the  exchange  of  that  many  individual  
coins. Rather, the gold piece is a standard measure of value, and the 
actual exchange is in gold bars, letters of credit, or valuable goods. 
The  most  prevalent  coin  among  commoners  is  the  silver  piece  
(sp).  A  gold  piece  is  worth  10  silver  pieces.  A  silver  piece  buys  a  
laborer’s  work  for  a  day,  a  common  lamp,  or  a  poor  meal  of  bread,  
baked turnips, onions, and water. 
Each  silver  piece  is  worth  10  copper  pieces  (cp).  A  single  copper  
piece  buys  a  candle,  a  torch,  or  a  piece  of  chalk.  Copper  piece  are  
common among laborers and beggars. 
In  addition  to  copper,  silver,  and  gold  coins,  which  people  use  
daily, merchants also recognize platinum pieces (pp), which are each 
worth 10 gp. These coins are not in common circulation, but adven-
turers occasionally find them as part of ancient treasure hoards. 
The  standard  coin  weighs  about  a  third  of  an  ounce  (fifty  to  the  
pound). It is the exact size of the coin pictured in the illustration on 
page 168. 
 
Table 7–2: Coins 
  ————— Exchange Value ———— 
   CP SP GP PP 
Copper piece (cp) = 1 1/10 1/100 1/1,000 
Silver piece (sp) = 10 1 1/10 1/100 
Gold piece (gp) = 100 10 1 1/10 
Platinum piece (pp) = 1,000 100 10 1
 
 
WEALTH OTHER THAN COINS 
Most wealth is not in coins. It is livestock, grain, land, rights to col-
lect taxes, or rights to resources (such as a mine or a forest). Gems 
and jewelry also serve as portable wealth. 
Trade 
Guilds,  nobles,  and  royalty  regulate  trade.  Chartered  companies  are  
granted  rights  to  dam  rivers  in  order  to  provide  power  for  mills,  to  
conduct   trade   along   certain   routes,   to   send   merchant   ships   to   
various  ports,  or  to  buy  or  sell  specific  goods.  Guilds  set  prices  for  
the  goods  or  services  that  they  control,  and  determine  who  may  or  
may   not   offer   those   goods   and   services.   Merchants   commonly   
exchange  trade  goods  commodities  without  using  currency.  As  a  
means  of  comparison,  some  trade  goods  are  detailed  on  Table  7–3:  
Trade Goods. 
 
Table 7–3: Trade Goods 
      Cost         Item      
 1 cp One pound of wheat 
 2 cp One pound of flour, or one chicken 
 1 sp One pound of iron 
 5 sp One pound of tobacco or copper 
 1 gp One pound of cinnamon, or one goat 
 2 gp One pound of ginger or pepper, or one sheep 
 3 gp One pig 
 4 gp One square yard of linen 
 5 gp One pound of salt or silver 
    10 gp One square yard of silk, or one cow 
    15 gp One pound of saffron or cloves, or one ox 
    50 gp One pound of gold 
  500 gp One pound of platinum 
 
SELLING LOOT 
In  general,  a  character  can  sell  something  for  half  its  listed  price.  
Characters  who  want  to  upgrade  to  better  armor  or  weaponry,  for  
example, can sell their old equipment for half price. 
Trade goods are the exception to the half-price rule. A trade good, 
in this sense, is a valuable good that can be easily exchanged almost 
as if it were cash itself. Wheat, flour, cloth, gems, jewelry, art objects, 
and  valuable  metals  are  trade  goods,  and  merchants  often  trade  in  
them directly without using currency (see Table 7–3: Trade Goods). 
Obviously,  merchants  can  sell  these  goods  for  slightly  more  than  
they pay for them, but the difference is small enough that you don’t 
have to worry about it. 
 
WEAPONS 
A character’s weapons help determine how capable here or she is in 
a  variety  of  combat  situations.  See  Table  7–4:  Weapons  for  the  
characteristics of various weapons.  
 
WEAPON CATEGORIES 
Weapons  are  grouped  into  several  interlocking  sets  of  categories.  
These  categories  pertain  to  what  training  is  needed  to  become  pro-
ficient  in  a  weapon’s  use  (simple,  martial,  or  exotic),  the  weapon’s  
usefulness  either  in  close  combat  (melee)  or  at  a  distance  (ranged,  
which  includes  both  thrown  and  projectile  weapons),  its  relative  
encumbrance   (light,   one-handed,   or   two-handed),   and   its   size   
(Small, Medium, or Large). 
Simple,  Martial,  and  Exotic  Weapons:  Anybody  but  a  druid,  
monk,  rogue,  or  wizard  is  proficient  with  all  simple  weapons.  Bar-
barians, fighters, paladins, and rangers are proficient with all simple 
and  all  martial  weapons.  Characters  of  other  classes  are  proficient  
with  an  assortment  of  mainly  simple  weapons  and  possibly  also  
some   martial   or   even   exotic   weapons.   A   character   who   uses   a   
weapon with which he or she is not proficient takes a –4 penalty on 
attack rolls. 
Melee   and   Ranged   Weapons:   Melee   weapons   are   used   for   
making  melee  attacks,  though  some  of  them  can  be  thrown  as  well.  
Ranged weapons are thrown weapons or projectile weapons that are 
not effective in melee. 
Reach  Weapons:  Glaives,  guisarmes,  lances,  longspears,  ranseurs,  