CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
23
For  multiclass  characters,  feats  and  ability  score  increases  are  
gained according to character level, not class level. Thus, a 3rd-level 
wizard/1st-level  fighter  is  a  4th-level  character  overall  and  eligible  
for her first ability score boost. 
 
CLASS DESCRIPTIONS 
The  rest  of  this  chapter,  up  to  the  section  on  multiclass  characters,  
describes  the  character  classes  in  alphabetical  order.  Each  descrip-
tion begins with a general discussion in “game world” terms, the sort 
of description that characters in the world could understand and the 
way   such   a   character   might   describe   himself   or   herself.   This   
information is followed by brief advice on such a character’s typical 
role   in   a   group   of   adventurers.   These   descriptions   are   general;   
individual members of a class may differ in their attitudes, outlooks, 
and other aspects. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Following  the  general  class  description  comes  game  rule  informa-
tion. Not all of the following categories apply to every class. 
Abilities:  The  Abilities  entry  tells  you  which  abilities  are  most  
important  for  a  character  of  that  class.  Players  are  welcome  to  “play  
against type,” but a typical character of that class will have his or her 
highest  ability  scores  where  they’ll  do  the  most  good  (or,  in  game  
world  terms,  be  attracted  to  the  class  that  most  suits  his  or  her  
talents or for which he or she is best qualified). 
Alignment:  A  few  classes  restrict  a  character’s  possible  align-
ments.  For  example,  a  bard  must  have  a  nonlawful  alignment.  An  
entry  of  “Any”  means  that  characters  of  this  class  are  not  restricted  
in alignment. 
Hit  Die:  The  type  of  Hit  Die  used  by  characters  of  the  class  
determines the number of hit points gained per level. 
 
HD Type Class 
   d4   Sorcerer,   wizard   
   d6   Bard,   rogue   
   d8 Cleric, druid, monk, ranger 
 d10 Fighter, paladin 
 d12 Barbarian 
 
A   character   rolls   one   Hit   Die   
each   time   he   or   she   gains   a   
new   level,   then   applies   any   
Constitution    modifier    to    the    
roll,  and  adds  the  result  to  his  or  
her    hit    point    total.    Thus,    a    
character  has  the  same  number  
of Hit Dice as levels. For his or 
her  first  Hit  Die,  a  1st-level  
character  gets  the  maximum  
hit  points  rather  than  rolling  
(although  Constitution  modi-
fiers,  positive  or  negative,  still  
apply). 
For  example,  Vadania  gets  a  d8  
Hit  Die  because  she’s  a  druid.  At  1st  
level,  she  gets  8  hit  points  instead  
of     rolling.     Since     she     has     a     
Constitution    score    of    13,    she    
applies a +1 bonus, raising her hit points to 9. When she 
reaches   2nd   level   (and   every   level   thereafter),   Vadania’s   
player rolls a d8, adds 1 (for her Constitution bonus), and then adds 
the total to Vadania’s hit points. 
If your character has a Constitution penalty and gets a result of 0 
or  lower  after  the  penalty  is  applied  to  the  Hit  Die  roll,  ignore  the  
roll  and  add  1  to  your  character’s  hit  point  total  anyway.  It  is  not  
possible to lose hit points (or not receive any) when gaining a level, 
even for a character with a rotten Constitution score. 
Class Table: This table details how a character improves as he or 
she  gains  levels  in  the  class.  Some  of  this  material  is  repeated  from  
Table 3–1: Base Save and Base Attack Bonuses, but with more detail 
on   how   the   numbers   apply   to   that   class.   Class   tables   typically   
include the following: 
Level: The character’s level in that class. 
Base  Attack  Bonus:  The  character’s  base  attack  bonus  and  number  
of attacks. 
Fort  Save:  The  base  save  bonus  on  Fortitude  saving  throws.  The  
character’s Constitution modifier also applies. 
Ref  Save:  The  base  save  bonus  on  Reflex  saving  throws.  The  char-
acter’s Dexterity modifier also applies. 
Will  Save:  The  base  save  bonus  on  Will  saving  throws.  The  char-
acter’s Wisdom modifier also applies. 
Special: Level-dependent class abilities, each explained in the Class 
Features section that follows. 
Spells  per  Day:  How  many  spells  of  each  spell  level  the  character  
can  cast  each  day.  If  the  entry  is  “—”  for  a  given  level  of  spells,  the  
character may not cast any spells of that level. If the entry is “0,” the 
character may cast spells of that level only if he or she is entitled to 
bonus  spells  because  of  a  high  ability  score  tied  to  spellcasting.  
(Bonus spells for wizards are based on Intelligence; bonus spells for 
clerics,  druids,  paladins,  and  rangers  are  based  on  Charisma.  See  
Table 1–1: Ability Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8.) If the entry is 
a number other than 0, the character may cast that many spells plus 
any bonus spells each day. 
A character can always choose to prepare a lower-level spell to fill 
a higher-level slot (see Spell Slots, page 178). 
Class  Skills:  This  section  of  a  class  description  gives  the  class’s  
list of class skills, the number of skill points the character starts with 
at   1st   level,   and   the   number   of   skill   points   gained   each   level   
thereafter.  A  character  gets  some  number  of  skill  points  each  level,  
such depending on the class in question, such as 6 for a ranger 
or  8  for  a  rogue.  To  this  number,  apply  the  character’s  
Intelligence modifier (and 1 bonus point, if the character 
is human) to determine the total skill points gained each 
level (but always at least 1 skill point per level, even for a 
character with an Intelligence penalty). A 1st-level char-
acter  starts  with  four  times  this  number  of  skill  points.  
Since the maximum ranks in a class skill for a character is 
the character’s level + 3, at 1st level you can buy as many as 4 
ranks in any class skill, at a cost of 1 skill point per rank. 
For  example,  Vadania  is  a  half-elf  druid,  so  she  gets  4  
skill  points  per  level.  She  has  a  +1  Intelligence  modi-
fier,  so  that  goes  up  to  5  skill  points  per  
level.   At   1st   level,   she   gets   four   
times that amount, or 20 skill 
points.    Her    maximum    
rank for a class skill at 
1st  level  is  4,  so  she  
could,   for   example,   
divvy     up     her     20     
points   among   five   class   
skills  with  4  ranks  each.  
(It’s   more   useful   to   
have      a      higher      
score   in   a   few   
skills      than      a      
lower score in many.) 
You can also buy skills from other classes’ skill lists, but each skill 
point only buys 1/2 rank in these cross-class skills, and you can buy 
only  half  the  maximum  ranks  a  class  skill  would  have  (thus,  the  
maximum rank for a cross-class skill at 1st level is 2). 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
24 
Class  Features:  Special  characteristics  of  the  class.  When  appli-
cable,  this  section  also  mentions  restrictions  and  disadvantages  of  
the class. Class features include some or all of the following. 
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: This section details which weapons 
and  armor  types  the  character  is  proficient  with.  Regardless  of  
training,  cumbersome  armor  interferes  with  certain  skills  (such  as  
Climb)  and  with  the  casting  of  most  arcane  spells.  Characters  can  
become  proficient  with  other  weapon  or  armor  types  by  acquiring  
the  appropriate  Armor  Proficiency  (light,  medium,  heavy),  Shield  
Proficiency,  and  Weapon  Proficiency  (exotic,  martial  or  simple)  
feats. (See Chapter 5: Feats.) 
Spells:  Wizards,  sorcerers,  clerics,  druids,  and  bards  use  spells.  
Fighters, barbarians, rogues, and monks do not. Paladins and rangers 
gain the ability to use spells at 4th level. 
Other  Features:  Each  class  has  certain  unique  capabilities.  Some,  
such as the rogue, have few; others, such as the monk, have many. 
Some  abilities  are  supernatural  or  spell-like.  Using  a  spell-like  
ability is essentially like casting a spell (but without components; see 
Components,  page  174),  and  it  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity.  
Using  a  supernatural  ability  is  not  like  casting  a  spell.  (See  Chapter  
8:  Combat,  especially  Attacks  of  Opportunity,  page  137,  and  Use  
Special Ability, page 142.) 
Ex-Members: If, for some reason, a character is forced to give up 
this  class,  these  are  the  rules  for  what  happens.  Unless  otherwise  
noted  in  the  class  description,  an  ex-member  of  a  class  retains  any  
weapon and armor proficiencies he or she has gained. 
Starting  Package:  This  section  provides  suggested  feats,  skills,  
equipment,  and  other  details  for  a  1st-level  character  of  this  class.  
You can ignore this information and create a character from scratch, 
or  use  the  package  as  is  for  your  first  character  (simply  copying  the  
details  onto  your  character  sheet),  or  take  some  portions  of  the  
package (such as equipment) and choose other details (such as skills) 
yourself.  Dungeon  Masters  can  also  use  these  packages  to  quickly  
create 1st-level nonplayer characters. 
The  starting  packages  assume  that  you  spend  4  skill  points  on  
every  skill  you  start  with  (so  as  to  excel  in  a  few  things  rather  than  
dabble  in  many).  The  skill  table  in  each  package  presents  the  skills  
in order of probable importance to the character. 
Each  starting  package  is  associated  with  a  race.  The  packages  do  
not take into account racial traits, so be sure to note your character’s 
racial   traits   (described   in   Chapter   2:   Races),   including   ability   
modifiers and bonuses on skill checks. The package also does not list 
all class features, so note your character’s class features as well. 
Gear for a character means adventuring gear, not clothes. Assume 
that  your  character  owns  at  least  one  outfit  of  normal  clothes.  Pick  
any one of the following clothing outfits (see Clothing in Chapter 7: 
Equipment)  for  free:  artisan’s  outfit,  entertainer’s  outfit,  explorer’s  
outfit,  monk’s  outfit,  peasant’s  outfit,  scholar’s  outfit,  or  traveler’s  
outfit. 
 
BARBARIAN 
From  the  frozen  wastes  of  the  north  and  the  hellish  jungles  of  the  
south come brave, even reckless, warriors. Civilized people call them 
barbarians or berserkers and suspect them of mayhem, impiety, and 
atrocities. These “barbarians,” however, have proven their mettle and 
their  value  to  those  who  would  be  their  allies.  To  enemies  who  
underestimated  them,  they  have  proved  their  cunning,  resource-
fulness, persistence, and mercilessness. 
Adventures:  Adventuring  is  the  best  chance  barbarians  have  of  
finding  a  place  in  a  civilized  society.  They’re  not  well  suited  to  the  
monotony  of  guard  duty  or  other  mundane  tasks.  Barbarians  also  
have  no  trouble  with  the  dangers,  the  uncertainties,  and  the  wan-
dering  that  adventuring  involves.  They  may  adventure  to  defeat  
hated  enemies.  They  have  a  noted  distaste  for  that  which  they  
consider unnatural, including undead, demons, and devils. 
Characteristics:  The  barbarian  is  an  excellent  warrior.  Where  
the  fighter’s  skill  in  combat  comes  from  training  and  discipline,  
however,  the  barbarian  has  a  powerful  rage.  While  in  this  berserk  
fury, he becomes stronger and tougher, better able to defeat his foes 
and  withstand  their  attacks.  These  rages  leave  him  winded,  and  he  
has  the  energy  for  only  a  few  such  spectacular  displays  per  day,  but  
those few rages are usually sufficient. He is at home in the wild, and 
he runs at great speed. 
Alignment: Barbarians are never lawful. They may be honorable, 
but  at  heart  they  are  wild.  This  wildness  is  their  strength,  and  it  
could   not   live   in   a   lawful   soul.   At   best,   barbarians   of   chaotic   
alignment  are  free  and  expressive.  At  worst,  they  are  thoughtlessly  
destructive. 
Religion:   Some   barbarians   distrust   established   religions   and   
prefer  an  intuitive,  natural  relationship  to  the  cosmos  over  formal  
worship. Others devote themselves to powerful deities, such as Kord 
(god  of  strength),  Obad-Hai  (god  of  nature),  or  Erythnul  (god  of  
slaughter). A barbarian is capable of fierce devotion to his god. 
Background:  Barbarians  come  from  uncivilized  lands  or  from  
barbaric  tribes  on  the  outskirts  of  civilization.  A  barbarian  adventu-
rer  may  have  been  lured  to  the  settled  lands  by  the  promise  of  
riches,  may  have  escaped  after  being  captured  in  his  homeland  and  
sold  into  “civilized”  slavery,  may  have  been  recruited  as  a  soldier,  or  
may  have  been  driven  out  of  his  homeland  by  invaders.  Barbarians  
share no bond with each other unless they come from the same tribe 
or  land.  In  fact,  they  think  of  themselves  not  as  barbarians  but  as  
warriors. 
Races:  Human  barbarians  come  from  the  distant  wild  lands  on  
the  edge  of  civilization.  Most  half-orc  barbarians  lived  among  orcs  
before abandoning them for human lands. Dwarf barbarians are rare, 
usually   hailing   from   dwarven   kingdoms   that   have   fallen   into   
barbarism  as  a  result  of  recurrent  war  with  goblinoids,  orcs,  and  
giants. Barbarians of other races are very rare. 
Among the brutal humanoids, barbarians are more common than 
fighters. Orcs and ogres are especially likely to be barbarians. 
Other  Classes:  As  people  of  the  wild,  barbarians  are  most  com-
fortable  in  the  company  of  rangers,  druids,  and  clerics  of  nature  
deities,  such  as  Obad-Hai  or  Ehlonna.  Many  barbarians  admire  the  
talents and spontaneity of bards, and some are enthusiastic lovers of 
music. Barbarians don’t trust that which they don’t understand, and 
that includes wizardry, which they call “book magic.” They find sor-
cerers  more  understandable  than  wizards,  but  maybe  that’s  just  
because  sorcerers  tend  to  be  more  charismatic.  Monks,  with  their  
studied, practiced, deliberate approach to combat, sometimes have a 
hard  time  seeing  eye  to  eye  with  barbarians,  but  members  of  these  
classes  aren’t  necessarily  hostile  to  each  other.  Barbarians  have  no  
special attitudes toward fighters, paladins, clerics, or rogues. 
Role: A barbarian’s typical primary role in a group of adventurers 
is as a front-line combat specialist. No other character can match his 
sheer  toughness.  He  can  also  serve  as  a  good  scout,  thanks  to  his  
speed, skill selection, and trap sense. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Barbarians have the following game statistics. 
Abilities: Strength is important for barbarians because of its role 
in  combat,  and  several  barbarian  class  skills  are  based  on  Strength.  
Dexterity is also useful to barbarians, especially those who wear light 
armor.  Wisdom  is  also  important  for  several  of  the  barbarian’s  class  
skills.  A  high  Constitution  score  lets  a  barbarian  rage  longer  (and  
live longer, because it gives him more hit points). 
Alignment: Any nonlawful. 
Hit Die: d12. 
 
Class Skills 
The  barbarian’s  class  skills  (and  the  key  ability  for  each  skill)  are  
Climb  (Str),  Craft  (Int),  Handle  Animal  (Cha),  Intimidate  (Cha),  
Jump (Str), Listen (Wis), Ride (Dex), Survival (Wis), and Swim (Str). 
See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
25
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the barbarian. 
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A barbarian is proficient with 
all  simple  and  martial  weapons,  light  armor,  medium  armor,  and  
shields (except tower shields). 
Fast  Movement  (Ex):  A  barbarian’s  land  
speed  is  faster  than  the  norm  for  his  race  by  
+10  feet.  This  benefit  applies  only  when  he  is  
wearing   no   armor,   light   armor,   or   medium   
armor  and  not  carrying  a  heavy  load.  Apply  
this bonus before modifying the barbarian’s 
speed   because   of   any   load   carried   or   
armor  worn.  For  example,  a  human  
barbarian   has   a   speed   of   40   feet,   
rather  than  30  feet,  when  wearing  
light  or  no  armor.  When  wearing  
medium    armor    or    carrying    a    
medium  load,  his  speed  drops  to  
30 feet. A halfling barbarian has a 
speed  of  30  feet,  rather  than  20  
feet,  in  light  or  no  armor.  When  
wearing      medium      armor      or      
carrying    a    medium    load,    his    
speed drops to 20 feet. 
Illiteracy:   Barbarians   are   the   
only     characters     who     do     not     
automatically   know   how   to   read   
and  write.  A  barbarian  may  spend  2  
skill  points  to  gain  the  ability  to  read  and  write  all  
languages he is able to speak. 
A  barbarian  who  gains  a  level  in  any  other  
class   automatically   gains   literacy.   Any   other   
character who gains a barbarian level does not 
lose the literacy he or she already had. 
Rage  (Ex):  A  barbarian  can  fly  into  a  
screaming blood frenzy a certain number 
of  times  per  day.  In  a  rage,  a  barbarian  
gains phenomenal strength and dura-
bility but becomes reckless and less 
able  to  defend  himself.  He  tempo-
rarily  gains  a  +4  bonus  to  Strength,  a  
+4  bonus  to  Constitution,  and  a  +2  morale  
bonus on Will saves, but he takes a –2 penalty to Armor Class. 
The  increase  in  Constitution  increases  the  barbarian’s  hit  points  
by  2  points  per  level,  but  these  hit  points  go  away  at  the  end  of  the  
rage when his Constitution score drops back to normal. (These extra 
hit  points  are  not  lost  first  the  way  temporary  hit  points  are;  see  
Temporary  Hit  Points,  page  146.)  While  raging,  a  barbarian  
cannot  use  any  Charisma-,  Dexterity-,  or  Intelligence-based  
skills  (except  for  Balance,  Escape  Artist,  Intimidate,  and  
Ride),  the  Concentration  skill,  or  any  abilities  that  require  
patience or concentration, nor can he cast spells or activate 
magic  items  that  require  a  command  word,  a  
spell trigger (such as a wand), or spell comple-
tion (such as a scroll) to function. He can use 
any feat he has except Combat Expertise, item 
creation    feats,    and    metamagic    
feats.  A  fit  of  rage  lasts  for  a  
number  of  rounds  equal  to  3  +  
the   character’s   (newly   
improved)  Constitution  
modifier.    A    barbarian    
may prematurely end his 
rage.   At   the   end   of   the   
rage,   the   barbarian   loses   
the rage modifiers and restric-
tions  and  becomes  fatigued  (–2  
penalty  to  Strength,  –2  penalty  to  Dex-
terity,   can’t   charge   or   run)   for   the   
duration    of    the    current    encounter    
(unless  he  is  a  17th-level  barbarian,  at  
which  point  this  limitation  no  longer  
applies; see below). 
A barbarian can fly into a rage 
only  once  per  encounter.  At  1st  
level  he  can  use  his  rage  ability  
once  per  day.  At  4th  level  and  
every  four  levels  there-
after,   he   can   use   it   
one     additional     time     
per  day  (to  a  maximum  
of   six   times   per   day   at   
20th level). Entering a rage 
takes   no   time   itself,   but   a   
barbarian  can  do  it  only  during  
his  action  (see  Initiative,  page  136),  not  in  response  to  some-
one else’s action. A barbarian can’t, for example, fly into a rage when 
Table 3–3: The Barbarian 
                                Base                                Fort                                Ref                                Will                                
Level                       Attack                       Bonus                       Save                        Save                       Save                       Special                       
  1st                        +1                                                +2                           +0                                +0                             Fast movement, illiteracy, rage 1/day 
 2nd +2 +3 +0 +0 Uncanny  dodge 
  3rd +3 +3 +1 +1 Trap sense +1 
  4th  +4  +4  +1  +1  Rage  2/day  
  5th +5 +4 +1 +1 Improved uncanny dodge 
  6th                         +6 /+1                                           +5                            +2                                +2                              Trap sense +2, Bonus Feat 
  7th +7/+2 +5 +2 +2 Damage reduction 1/— 
  8th  +8/+3  +6  +2  +2  Rage  3/day  
  9th +9/+4 +6 +3 +3 Trap sense +3 
10th                        +10/+5                                        +7                           +3                                +3                             Damage reduction 2/— 
11th                        +11/+6/+1                        +7                           +3                        +3                        Greater                        rage                        
12th                          +12/ +7/ +2                                    +8                             +4                                  +4                               Rage 4/day, trap sense +4, Bonus Feat 
13th +13/+8/+3 +8 +4 +4 Damage reduction 3/— 
14th                        +14/+9/+4                        +9                           +4                        +4                        Indomitable                        will                        
15th +15/+10/+5 +9 +5 +5 Trap sense +5 
16th +16/+11/+6/+1 +10 +5 +5 Damage reduction 4/—, rage 5/day 
17th                        +17/+12/+7/+2                         +10                          +5                        +5                        Tireless                        rage                        
18th                          +18/ +13/ +8/ +3                          +11                            +6                                 +6                               Trap sense +6, Bonus Feat 
19th +19/+14/+9/+4 +11 +6 +6 Damage reduction 5/— 
20th +20/+15/+10/+5 +12 +6 +6 Mighty rage, rage 6/day 
Krusk
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
26 
struck down by an arrow in order to get the extra hit points from the 
increased  Constitution,  although  the  extra  hit  points  would  be  of  
benefit  if  he  had  gone  into  a  rage  earlier  in  the  round,  before  the  
arrow struck 
Uncanny  Dodge  (Ex):  At  2nd  level,  a  barbarian  gains  the  ability  
to react to danger before his senses would normally allow him to do 
so. He retains his Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) even if he is caught 
flat-footed  or  struck  by  an  invisible  attacker.  However,  he  still  loses  
his Dexterity bonus to AC if immobilized. 
If a barbarian already has uncanny dodge from a different class (a 
barbarian   with   at   least   four   levels   of   rogue,   for   example),   he   
automatically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below) instead. 
Trap Sense (Ex): Starting at 3rd level, a barbarian has an intuitive 
sense that alerts him to danger from traps, giving him a +1 bonus on 
Reflex saves made to avoid traps and a +1 dodge bonus to AC against 
attacks   made   by   traps.   These   bonuses   rise   by   +1   every   three   
barbarian levels thereafter (6th, 9th, 12th, 15th, and 18th level). Trap 
sense bonuses gained from multiple classes stack. 
Improved  Uncanny  Dodge  (Ex):  At  5th  level  and  higher,  a  
barbarian  can  no  longer  be  flanked;  he  can  react  to  opponents  on  
opposite  sides  of  him  as  easily  as  he  can  react  to  a  single  attacker.  
This defense denies a rogue the ability to sneak attack the barbarian 
by  flanking  him,  unless  the  attacker  has  at  least  four  more  rogue  
levels than the target has barbarian levels. 
If  a  character  already  has  uncanny  dodge  (see  above)  from  a  
second  class,  the  character  automatically  gains  improved  uncanny  
dodge  instead,  and  the  levels  from  the  classes  that  grant  uncanny  
dodge  stack  to  determine  the  minimum  level  a  rogue  must  be  to  
flank the character. 
Damage  Reduction  (Ex):  At  7th  level,  a  barbarian  gains  the  
ability to shrug off some amount of injury from each blow or attack. 
Subtract 1 from the damage the barbarian takes each time he is dealt 
damage  from  a  weapon  or  a  natural  attack.  At  10th  level,  and  every  
three  barbarian  levels  thereafter  (13th,  16th,  and  19th  level),  this  
damage  reduction  rises  by  1  point.  Damage  reduction  can  reduce  
damage to 0 but not below 0. 
Greater   Rage   (Ex):   At   11th   level,   a   barbarian’s   bonuses   to   
Strength  and  Constitution  during  his  rage  each  increase  to  +6,  and  
his  morale  bonus  on  Will  saves  increases  to  +3.  The  penalty  to  AC  
remains at –2. 
Indomitable Will (Ex): While in a rage, a barbarian of 14th level 
or  higher  gains  a  +4  bonus  on  Will  saves  to  resist  enchantment  
spells.  This  bonus  stacks  with  all  other  modifiers,  including  the  
morale bonus on Will saves he also receives during his rage. 
Tireless  Rage  (Ex):  At  17th  level  and  higher,  a  barbarian  no  
longer becomes fatigued at the end of his rage. 
Mighty   Rage   (Ex):   At   20th   level,   a   barbarian’s   bonuses   to   
Strength  and  Constitution  during  his  rage  each  increase  to  +8,  and  
his  morale  bonus  on  Will  saves  increases  to  +4.  The  penalty  to  AC  
remains at –2. 
 
Ex-Barbarians 
A barbarian who becomes lawful loses the ability to rage and cannot 
gain  more  levels  as  a  barbarian.  He  retains  all  the  other  benefits  of  
the   class   (damage   reduction,   fast   movement,   trap   sense,   and   
uncanny dodge). 
 
Half-Orc Barbarian Starting Package 
Armor:  Studded  leather  (+3  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –1,  speed  
40 ft., 20 lb.). 
Weapons: Greataxe (1d12, crit ×3, 12 lb., two-handed, slashing). 
Shortbow (1d6, crit ×3, range inc. 60 ft., 2 lb., Piercing). 
Dagger (1d4, crit 19–20/×2, range inc. 10 ft., 1 lb., light, piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 4 + Int modifier. 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Climb                                           4                                           Str                                           –1                                           
Survival                                        4                                        Wis                                        —                                        
Listen                                           4                                           Wis                                           —                                           
Jump                                            4                                            Str                                            –1                                            
Swim                                            4                                            Str                                            –2                                            
Ride                                              4                                              Dex                                              —                                              
Intimidate                                    4                                    Cha                                    —                                    
Spot (cc) 2 Wis —
 
 
Feat: Weapon Focus (greataxe). 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, and flint and steel. Quiver with 20 arrows. 
Gold: 2d4 gp. 
 
BARD 
It  is  said  that  music  has  a  special  magic,  and  the  bard  proves  that  
saying  true.  Wandering  across  the  land,  gathering  lore,  telling  sto-
ries,  working  magic  with  his  music,  and  living  on  the  gratitude  of  
his  audience—such  is  the  life  of  a  bard.  When  chance  or  opportu-
nity  draws  them  into  a  conflict,  bards  serve  as  diplomats,  negotia-
tors, messengers, scouts, and spies. 
A  bard’s  magic  comes  from  the  heart.  If  his  heart  is  good,  a  bard  
brings  hope  and  courage  to  the  downtrodden  and  uses  his  tricks,  
music, and magic to thwart the schemes of evildoers. If the nobles of 
the   land   are   corrupt,   the   good   bard   is   an   enemy   of   the   state,   
cunningly  evading  capture  and  raising  the  spirits  of  the  oppressed.  
But  music  can  spring  from  an  evil  heart  as  well.  Evil  bards  forego  
blatant  violence  in  favor  of  manipulation,  holding  sway  over  the  
hearts  and  minds  of  others  and  taking  what  enraptured  audiences  
“willingly” give. 
Adventures: Bards see adventures as opportunities to learn. They 
practice their many skills and abilities, and they especially relish the 
opportunity  to  enter  a  long-forgotten  tomb,  to  discover  ancient  
works of magic, to decipher old tomes, to travel to strange places, to 
encounter exotic creatures, and to learn new songs and stories. Bards 
love  to  accompany  heroes  (and  villains),  joining  their  entourage  to  
witness their deeds firsthand—a bard who can tell a marvelous story 
from  personal  experience  earns  renown  among  his  fellows.  Indeed,  
after telling so many stories about heroes doing mighty deeds, many 
bards  take  these  themes  to  heart  and  assume  heroic  roles  them-
selves. 
Characteristics:  A  bard  brings  forth  magic  from  his  soul,  not  
from  a  book.  He  can  cast  only  a  small  number  of  spells,  but  he  can  
do  so  without  selecting  or  preparing  them  in  advance.  His  magic  
emphasizes  charms  and  illusions  over  the  more  dramatic  evocation  
spells that wizards and sorcerers often use. 
In  addition  to  spells,  a  bard  works  magic  with  his  music  and  
poetry. He can encourage allies, hold his audiences rapt, and counter 
magical effects that rely on speech or sound. 
Bards  have  some  of  the  skills  that  rogues  have,  although  bards  
they are not as focused on skill mastery as rogues are. A bard listens 
to  stories  as  well  as  telling  them,  of  course,  so  he  has  a  vast  knowl-
edge of local events and noteworthy items. 
Alignment:  Bards  are  wanderers,  guided  by  whim  and  intuition  
rather  than  by  tradition  or  law.  The  spontaneous  talent,  magic,  and  
lifestyle of the bard are incompatible with a lawful alignment. 
Religion:  Bards  revere  Fharlanghn  (god  of  roads).  They  some-
times camp near his wayside shrines, hoping to earn some coin from 
the  travelers  who  stop  to  leave  offerings  for  the  god.  Many  bards,  
even  those  who  are  not  elves,  worship  Corellon  Larethian,  god  of  
elves and patron of poetry and music. Many good bards are partial to 
Pelor (god of the sun), believing that he watches over them in their 
travels.    Bards    given    to    chaos    and    occasional    larceny    favor    
Olidammara  (god  of  thieves).  Those  who  have  turned  to  evil  ways  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
                                                                                                                                                                               
27
are  known  to  worship  Erythnul  (the  god  of  slaughter),  though  few  
will admit to it. In any event, bards spend so much time on the road 
that, while they may be devoted to a deity, they are rarely devoted to 
any particular temple. 
Background:  An  apprentice  bard  learns  his  skills  from  a  
single experienced bard, whom he follows and serves until he is 
ready to strike out on his own. Many bards were once young run-
aways  or  orphans,  befriended  by  wandering  bards  who  became  
their  mentors.  Since  bards  occasionally  congregate  in  informal  
“colleges,”   the   apprentice   bard   may   
meet  many  of  the  more  prominent  
bards in the area. Still, the bard has no 
strong  allegiance  to  bards  as  a  whole.  
In    fact,    some    bards    are    highly    
competitive with other bards, jealous 
of   their   reputations   and   defensive   
about their territories. 
Races:    Bards    are    commonly    
human,   gnome,   elf,   or   half-elf.   
Humans take well to the wander-
ing  life  and  adapt  easily  to  new  
lands    and    customs.    Gnomes    
have   a   sense   of   humor   and   
trickery   that   lends   itself   to   a   
bardic  career.  Elves  are  talented  
in  music  and  magic,  so  
the   career   of   the   bard   
comes  naturally  to  them.  
A  bard’s  wandering  ways  
suit many half-elves, who 
often  feel  like  strangers  
even     when     at     home.     
Half-orcs,   even   those   raised   
among  humans,  find  themselves  
ill   suited   to   the   demands   of   a   
bard’s  career.  There  are  no  bardic  
traditions   among   dwarves,   
or         halflings,         though         
occasional  individuals  of  these  races  
find teachers to train them in the ways 
of the bard. 
Bards  are  exceedingly  rare  among  the  savage  humanoids,  except  
among  centaurs.  Centaur  bards  sometimes  train  the  children  of  
humans or other humanoids. 
Other   Classes:   A   bard   works   well   
with  companions  of  other  classes.  He  
often  serves  as  the  spokesman  of  the  
party, using his social skills for the 
party’s benefit. In a party without a 
wizard  or  sorcerer,  the  bard  con-
tributes    his    magic.    In    a    party    
without a rogue, he uses his skills. 
A  bard  is  curious  about  the  ways  
of   more   focused   or   dedicated   
adventurers,  so  he  often  tries  to  
pick     up     pointers     from     
fighters,      sorcerers,      and      
rogues. 
Role:   The   bard   is   perhaps   the   
ultimate       generalist.       In       most       
adventuring  groups,  he  works  best  
in a supporting role. He can’t usually 
match  the  stealth  of  the  ranger  or  
the    rogue,    the    spellcasting    
power   of   the   cleric   or   the   
wizard, or the combat prowess 
of the barbarian or the fighter. 
However,    he    makes    all    the    
other  characters  better  at  what  
they  do,  and  he  can  often  fill  in  
for  another  character  when  needed.  
For    a    typical    group    of    four    
characters,  the  bard  is  perhaps  
the  most  useful  fifth  character  to  
consider  adding,  and  he  can  make  a  
great team leader. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Bards have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:     Charisma     determines     how     
powerful  a  spell  a  bard  can  cast,  how  many  
spells  he  can  cast  per  day,  and  how  hard  
 
Table 3–4: The Bard 
 Base Fort Ref Will  ––—— Spells per Day ——–— 
Level     Attack    Bonus    Save    Save    Save    Special    0      1st    2nd    3rd    4th    5th    6th    
     1st      +0     +0     +2     +2     Bardic     music,     bardic     knowledge,     2      —     —     —     —     —     —     
      countersong, fascinate, inspire courage +1 
     2nd      +1     +0     +3     +3          3       0      —     —     —     —     —     
     3rd      +2     +1     +3     +3     Inspire     competence     3       1      —     —     —     —     —     
     4th      +3     +1     +4     +4          3       2       0      —     —     —     —     
  5th      +3                                  +1              +4              +4                Bonus Feat                                                                    3       3       1      —     —     —     —     
  6th  +4  +2  +5  +5  Suggestion     3       3       2      —     —     —     —     
       7th       +5       +2       +5       +5              3       3       2       0       —       —       —       
  8th +6/+1 +2 +6 +6 Inspire courage +2 3 3 3 1 —     —     — 
       9th       +6/+1       +3       +6       +6       Inspire       greatness       3       3       3       2       —       —       —       
10th      +7/+2                             +3              +7              +7                
Bonus Feat                                                                     3       3       3       2       0      —     —       
11th       +8/+3       +3       +7       +7              3       3       3       3       1       —       —       
12th      +9/+4                            +4              +8              +8                Song of freedom                                                           3       3       3       3       2      —     —       
13th       +9/+4       +4       +8       +8              3       3       3       3       2       0       —       
14th       +10/+5       +4       +9       +9       Inspire       courage       +3                                                      4       3       3       3       3       1      —       
15th       +11/+6/+1       +5       +9       +9       Inspire       her  oics, Bonus Feat                                            4       4       3       3       3       2      —       
16th       +12/+7/+2       +5       +10       +10              4       4       4       3       3       2       0       
17th       +12/+7/+2       +5       +10       +10              4       4       4       4       3       3       1       
18th      +13/+8/+3      +6      +11      +11      Mass suggestion       4       4       4       4       4       3       2       
19th       +14/+9/+4       +6       +11       +11              4       4       4       4       4       4       3       
20th       +15/+10/+5       +6       +12       +12       Inspire       courage       +4
, Bonus Feat                                     4       4       4       4       4       4       4       
Illus. by W. Reynolds 
Gimble
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
28 
those spells are to resist (see Spells, below). Charisma, Dexterity, and 
Intelligence are important for many of the bard’s class skills. 
Alignment: Any nonlawful. 
Hit Die: d6. 
 
Class Skills 
The bard’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Appraise 
(Int),  Balance  (Dex),  Bluff  (Cha),  Climb  (Str),  Concentration  (Con),  
Craft  (Int),  Decipher  Script  (Int),  Diplomacy  (Cha),  Disguise  (Cha),  
Escape  Artist  (Dex),  Gather  Information  (Cha),  Hide  (Dex),  Jump  
(Str),  Knowledge  (all  skills,  taken  individually)  (Int),  Listen  (Wis),  
Move Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis), Sense Motive 
(Wis), Sleight of Hand (Dex), Speak Language (n/a), Spellcraft (Int), 
Swim   (Str),   Tumble   (Dex),   and   Use   Magic   Device   (Cha).   See   
Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (6 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 6 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the bard. 
Weapon  and  Armor  Proficiency:  A  bard  is  proficient  with  all  
simple   weapons,   plus   the   longsword,   rapier,   sap,   short   sword,   
shortbow,  and  whip.  Bards  are  proficient  with  light  armor  and  
shields (except tower shields). 
Because  the  somatic  components  required  for  bard  spells  are  
relatively  simple,  a  bard  can  cast  bard  spells  while  wearing  light  
armor  without  incurring  the  normal  arcane  spell  failure  chance.  
However,  like  any  other  arcane  spellcaster,  a  bard  wearing  medium  
or  heavy  armor  or  using  a  shield  incurs  a  chance  of  arcane  spell  
failure if the spell in question has a somatic component (most do). A 
multiclass bard still incurs the normal arcane spell failure chance for 
arcane spells received from other classes. 
Spells: A bard casts arcane spells (the same type of spells available 
to sorcerers and wizards), which are drawn from the bard spell (page 
181) list. He can cast any spell he knows without preparing it ahead 
of time, the way a wizard or cleric must (see below). Every bard spell 
has a verbal component (singing, reciting, or music). 
To learn or cast a spell, a bard must have a Charisma score equal to 
at  least  10  +  the  spell  level  (Cha  10  for  0-level  spells,  Cha  11  for  1st-
level  spells,  and  so  forth).  The  Difficulty  Class  for  a  saving  throw  
against  a  bard’s  spell  is  10  +  the  spell  level  +  the  bard’s  Charisma  
modifier. 
Like  other  spellcasters,  a  bard  can  cast  only  a  certain  number  of  
spells  of  each  spell  level  per  day.  His  base  daily  spell  allotment  is  
given  on  Table  3–4:  The  Bard.  In  addition,  he  receives  bonus  spells  
per  day  if  he  has  a  high  Charisma  score  (see  Table  1–1:  Ability  
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). When Table 3–4 indicates that 
the bard gets 0 spells per day of a given spell level (for instance, 1st-
level  spells  for  a  2nd-level  bard),  he  gains  only  the  bonus  spells  he  
would be entitled to based on his Charisma score for that spell level. 
The  bard’s  selection  of  spells  is  extremely  limited.  A  bard  begins  
play knowing four 0-level spells (also called cantrips) of your choice. 
At  most  new  bard  levels,  he  gains  one  or  more  new  spells,  as  
indicated  on  Table  3–5:  Bard  Spells  Known.  (Unlike  spells  per  day,  
the  number  of  spells  a  bard  knows  is  not  affected  by  his  Charisma  
score; the numbers on Table 3–5 are fixed.) 
Upon  reaching  5th  level,  and  at  every  third  bard  level  after  that  
(8th, 11th, and so on), a bard can choose to learn a new spell in place 
of  one  he  already  knows.  In  effect,  the  bard  “loses”  the  old  spell  in  
exchange for the new one. The new spell’s level must be the same as 
that  of  the  spell  being  exchanged,  and  it  must  be  at  least  two  levels  
lower   than   the   highest-level   bard   spell   the   bard   can   cast.   For   
instance, upon reaching 5th level, a bard could trade a single 0-level 
spell (two spell levels below the highest-level bard spell he can cast, 
which is 2nd) for a different 0-level spell. At 8th level, he could trade 
in  a  single  0-level  or  1st-level  spell  (since  he  now  can  cast  3rd-level  
bard  spells)  for  a  different  spell  of  the  same  level.  A  bard  may  swap  
only  a  single  spell  at  any  given  level,  and  must  choose  whether  or  
not  to  swap  the  spell  at  the  same  time  that  he  gains  new  spells  
known for the level. 
As noted above, a bard need not prepare his spells in advance. He 
can  cast  any  spell  he  knows  at  any  time,  assuming  he  has  not  yet  
used  up  his  allotment  of  spells  per  day  for  the  spell’s  level.  For  
example, at 1st level, Gimble the bard can cast two 0-level spells per 
day for being 1st level (see Table 3–4: The Bard). However, he knows 
four  0-level  spells:  detect  magic, ghost  sound, light,  and  read  magic  (see  
Table  3–5:  Bard  Spells  Known).  Thus,  on  any  given  day,  he  can  cast  
some  combination  of  those  four  spells  a  total  of  two  times.  He  does  
not have to decide ahead of time which spells he’ll cast. 
Bardic  Knowledge:  A  bard  picks  up  a  lot  of  stray  knowledge  
while wandering the land and learning stories from other bards. He 
may  make  a  special  bardic  knowledge  check  with  a  bonus  equal  to  
his  bard  level  +  his  Intelligence  modifier  to  see  whether  he  knows  
some  relevant  information  about  local  notable  people,  legendary  
items,  or  noteworthy  places.  (If  the  bard  has  5  or  more  ranks  in  
Knowledge (history), he gains a +2 bonus on this check.) 
 
DC Type of Knowledge Examples 
10 Common, known by at least A local mayor’s reputation for 
 a substantial minority drinking; common legends 
 of the local population. about a powerful place of 
                          mystery.             
20 Uncommon but available, A local priest’s shady past; 
 known by only a few people legends about a powerful 
 in the area. Magic item. 
25 Obscure, known by few, A knight’s family history; 
 hard to come by. legends about a minor place 
  of mystery or magic item 
30 Extremely obscure, known A mighty wizard’s childhood 
 by very few, possibly forgotten    nickname; the history of a 
 by most who once knew petty magic item. 
 it, possibly known only by 
 those who don’t understand 
 the significance of the knowledge.
 
 
Table 3–5: Bard Spells Known 
 ———————— Spells Known ———————— 
Level         0           1st            2nd            3rd         4th             5th         6th         
              1st              4              —              —              —              —              —              —              
 2nd 5 2
1
               —              —              —              —              —              
              3rd              6              3               —              —              —              —              —              
  4th  6  3  2
1
              —              —              —              —              
  5th  6  4  3  —  —  —  —  
  6th  6  4  3  —  —  —  —  
  7th  6  4  4  2
1
           —              —           —           
                8th                6                4                4                3                —                —                —                
                9th                6                4                4                3                —                —                —                
10th                6                4                4                4                2
1
              —              —              
11th                6                4                4                4                3                —                —                
12th                6                4                4                4                3                —                —                
13th                6                4                4                4                4                2
1
           —           
14th                6                4                4                4                4                3                —                
15th                6                4                4                4                4                3                —                
16th                6                5                4                4                4                4                2
1
 
17th                6                5                5                4                4                4                3                
18th                6                5                5                5                4                4                3                
19th                6                5                5                5                5                4                4                
20th                6                5                5                5                5                5                4                
1 Provided the bard has a high enough Charisma score to have a bonus 
spell of this level. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
29
A  successful  bardic  knowledge  check  will  not  reveal  the  powers  
of a magic item but may give a hint as to its general function. A bard 
may  not  take  10  or  take  20  on  this  check;  this  sort  of  knowledge  is  
essentially  random.  The  DM  can  determine  the  Difficulty  Class  of  
the check by referring to the table above. 
Bardic  Music:  Once  per  day  per  bard  level,  a  bard  can  use  his  
song  or  poetics  to  produce  magical  effects  on  those  around  him  
(usually  including  himself,  if  desired).  While  these  abilities  fall  
under  the  category  of  bardic  music  and  the  descriptions  discuss  
singing  or  playing  instruments,  they  can  all  be  activated  by  reciting  
poetry,  chanting,  singing  lyrical  songs,  singing  melodies  (fa-la-la,  
and   so   forth),   whistling,   playing   an   instrument,   or   playing   an   
instrument  in  combination  with  some  spoken  performance.  Each  
ability requires both a minimum bard level and a minimum number 
of  ranks  in  the  Perform  skill  to  qualify;  if  a  bard  does  not  have  the  
required  number  of  ranks  in  at  least  one  Perform  skill,  he  does  not  
gain the bardic music ability until he acquires the needed ranks. 
Starting  a  bardic  music  effect  is  a  standard  action.  Some  bardic  
music  abilities  require  concentration,  which  means  the  bard  must  
take  a  standard  action  each  round  to  maintain  the  ability.  Even  
while  using  bardic  music  that  doesn’t  require  concentration,  a  bard  
cannot cast spells, activate magic items by spell completion (such as 
scrolls), or activate magic items by magic word (such as wands). Just 
as  for  casting  a  spell  with  a  verbal  component  (see  Components,  
page  174),  a  deaf  bard  has  a  20%  chance  to  fail  when  attempting  to  
use bardic music. If he fails, the attempt still counts against his daily 
limit. 
Countersong  (Su):  A  bard  with  3  or  more  ranks  in  a  Perform  skill  
can  use  his  music  or  poetics  to  counter  magical  effects  that  depend  
on sound (but not spells that simply have verbal components). Each 
round  of  the  countersong,  he  makes  a  Perform  check.  Any  creature  
within  30  feet  of  the  bard  (including  the  bard  himself  )  that  is  
affected  by  a  sonic  or  language-dependent  magical  attack  (such  as  a  
sound  burst  or  command  spell)  may  use  the  bard’s  Perform  check  
result in place of its saving throw if, after the saving throw is rolled, 
the  Perform  check  result  proves  to  be  higher.  If  a  creature  within  
range of the countersong is already under the effect of a noninstan-
taneous   sonic   or   language-dependent   magical   attack,   it   gains   
another  saving  throw  against  the  effect  each  round  it  hears  the  
countersong, but it must use the bard’s Perform check result for the 
save. Countersong has no effect against effects that don’t allow saves. 
The bard may keep up the countersong for 10 rounds. 
Fascinate  (Sp):  A  bard  with  3  or  more  ranks  in  a  Perform  skill  can  
use  his  music  or  poetics  to  cause  one  or  more  creatures  to  become  
fascinated  with  him.  Each  creature  to  be  fascinated  must  be  within  
90  feet,  able  to  see  and  hear  the  bard,  and  able  to  pay  attention  to  
him.  The  bard  must  also  be  able  to  see  the  creature.  The  distraction  
of  a  nearby  combat  or  other  dangers  prevents  the  ability  from  
working.  For  every  three  levels  a  bard  attains  beyond  1st,  he  can  
target one additional creature with a single use of this ability (two at 
4th level, three at 7th level, and so on). 
To use the ability, a bard makes a Perform check. His check result 
is the DC for each affected creature’s Will save against the effect. If a 
creature’s   saving   throw   succeeds,   the   bard   cannot   attempt   to   
fascinate  that  creature  again  for  24  hours.  If  its  saving  throw  fails,  
the  creature  sits  quietly  and  listens  to  the  song,  taking  no  other  
actions, for as long as the bard continues to play and concentrate (up 
to  a  maximum  of  1  round  per  bard  level).  While  fascinated,  a  target  
takes  a  –4  penalty  on  skill  checks  made  as  reactions,  such  as  Listen  
and  Spot  checks.  Any  potential  threat  requires  the  bard  to  make  
another  Perform  check  and  allows  the  creature  a  new  saving  throw  
against  a  DC  equal  to  the  new  Perform  check  result.  Any  obvious  
threat, such as someone drawing a weapon, casting a spell, or aiming 
a   ranged   weapon   at   the   target,   automatically   breaks   the   effect.   
Fascinate is an enchantment (compulsion), mind-affecting ability. 
Inspire Courage (Su): A bard with 3 or more ranks in a Perform skill 
can  use  song  or  poetics  to  inspire  courage  in  his  allies  (including  
himself  ),  bolstering  them  against  fear  and  improving  their  combat  
abilities.  To  be  affected,  an  ally  must  be  able  to  hear  the  bard  sing.  
The  effect  lasts  for  as  long  as  the  ally  hears  the  bard  sing  and  for  5  
rounds  thereafter.  An  affected  ally  receives  a  +1  morale  bonus  on  
saving throws against charm and fear effects and a +1 morale bonus 
on  attack  and  weapon  damage  rolls.  At  8th  level,  and  every  six  bard  
levels thereafter, this bonus increases by 1 (+2 at 8th, +3 at 14th, and 
+4 at 20th). Inspire courage is a mind-affecting ability. 
Inspire  Competence  (Su):  A  bard  of  3rd  level  or  higher  with  6  or  
more ranks in a Perform skill can use his music or poetics to help an 
ally succeed at a task. The ally must be within 30 feet and able to see 
and  hear  the  bard.  The  bard  must  also  be  able  to  see  the  ally.  
Depending on the task that the ally has at hand, the bard may use his 
bardic  music  to  lift  the  ally’s  spirits,  to  help  him  or  her  focus  
mentally, or in some other way. The ally gets a +2 competence bonus 
on skill checks with a particular skill as long as he or she continues 
to  hear  the  bard’s  music.  The  DM  may  rule  that  certain  uses  of  this  
ability are infeasible—chanting to make a rogue move more quietly, 
for  example,  is  self-defeating.  The  effect  lasts  as  long  as  the  bard  
concentrates,  up  to  a  maximum  of  2  minutes.  A  bard  can’t  inspire  
competence   in   himself.   Inspire   competence   is   a   mind-affecting   
ability. 
Suggestion (Sp): A bard of 6th level or higher with 9 or more ranks 
in  a  Perform  skill  can  make  a  suggestion  (as  the  spell)  to  a  creature  
that he has already fascinated (see above). Using this ability does not 
break  the  bard’s  concentration  on  the  fascinate  effect,  nor  does  it  
allow  a  second  saving  throw  against  the  fascinate  effect.  Making  a  
suggestion  doesn’t  count  against  a  bard’s  daily  limit  on  bardic  music  
performances. A Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 bard’s level + bard’s 
Cha  modifier)  negates  the  effect.  This  ability  affects  only  a  single  
creature  (but  see  mass  suggestion,  below).  Suggestion  is  an  enchant-
ment (compulsion), mind-affecting, language dependent ability. 
Inspire Greatness (Su): A bard of 9th level or higher with 12 or more 
ranks in a Perform skill can use music or poetics to inspire greatness 
in himself or a single willing ally within 30 feet, granting him or her 
extra fighting capability. For every three levels a bard attains beyond 
9th, he can target one additional ally with a single use of this ability 
(two at 12th level, three at 15th, four at 18th). To inspire greatness, a 
bard must sing and an ally must hear him sing. The effect lasts for as 
long  as  the  ally  hears  the  bard  sing  and  for  5  rounds  thereafter.  A  
creature  inspired  with  greatness  gains  2  bonus  Hit  Dice  (d10s),  the  
commensurate  number  of  temporary  hit  points  (apply  the  target’s  
Constitution   modifier,   if   any,   to   these   bonus   Hit   Dice),   a   +2   
competence  bonus  on  attack  rolls,  and  a  +1  competence  bonus  on  
Fortitude  saves.  The  bonus  Hit  Dice  count  as  regular  Hit  Dice  for  
determining  the  effect  of  spells  such  as  sleep.  Inspire  greatness  is  a  
mind-affecting ability. 
Song  of  Freedom  (Sp):  A  bard  of  12th  level  or  higher  with  15  or  
more  ranks  in  a  Perform  skill  can  use  music  or  poetics  to  create  an  
effect  equivalent  to  the  break  enchantment  spell  (caster  level  equals  
the  character’s  bard  level).  Using  this  ability  requires  1  minute  of  
uninterrupted concentration and music, and it functions on a single 
target within 30 feet. A bard can’t use song of freedom on himself. 
Inspire Heroics (Su): A bard of 15th level or higher with 18 or more 
ranks   in   a   Perform   skill   can   use   music   or   poetics   to   inspire   
tremendous  heroism  in  himself  or  a  single  willing  ally  within  30  
feet,   allowing   that   creature   to   fight   bravely   even   against   over-
whelming  odds.  For  every  three  bard  levels  the  character  attains  
beyond  15th,  he  can  inspire  heroics  in  one  additional  creature.  To  
inspire heroics, a bard must sing and an ally must hear the bard sing 
for  a  full  round.  A  creature  so  inspired  gains  a  +4  morale  bonus  on  
saving  throws  and  a  +4  dodge  bonus  to  AC.  The  effect  lasts  for  as  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
30 
long as the ally hears the bard sing and for up to 5 rounds thereafter. 
Inspire heroics is a mind-affecting ability. 
Mass  Suggestion  (Sp):  This  ability  functions  like  suggestion,  above,  
except that a bard of 18th level or higher with 21 or more ranks in a 
Perform skill can make the suggestion simultaneously to any number 
of creatures that he has already fascinated (see above). Mass suggestion 
is  an  enchantment  (compulsion),  mind-affecting,  language-depen-
dent ability. 
 
Ex-Bards 
A  bard  who  becomes  lawful  in  alignment  cannot  progress  in  levels  
as a bard, though he retains all his bard abilities. 
 
Gnome Bard Starting Package 
Armor:  Studded  leather  (+3  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –1,  arcane  
spell failure chance n/a, speed 20 ft., 10 lb.). 
Weapons:  Longsword  (1d6,  crit  19–20/×2,  2  lb.,  one-handed,  
slashing). 
Light  crossbow  (1d6,  crit  19–20/×2,  range  inc.  80  ft.,  2  lb.,  pierc-
ing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 6 + Int modifier. 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Perform (string instruments) 4 Cha — 
Spellcraft                                      4                                      Int                                      —                                      
Use Magic Device 4 Cha — 
Gather Information 4 Cha — 
Listen                                           4                                           Wis                                           —                                           
Decipher Script 4 Int — 
Diplomacy                                   4                                   Cha                                   —                                   
Knowledge (any one) 4 Int — 
Sleight of Hand 4 Dex –1 
Disguise                                       4                                       Cha                                       —
 
 
Feat:  If  Dexterity  is  13  or  higher,  Dodge;  if  Dexterity  is  12  or  
lower, Improved Initiative instead. 
Spells Known: 0 level—detect magic, ghost sound, light, read magic. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, and flint and steel. Three torches. Case with 10 crossbow bolts. 
Lute (common). Spell component pouch. 
Gold: 2d4 gp. 
 
CLERIC 
The  handiwork  of  the  gods  is  everywhere—in  places  of  natural  
beauty,  in  mighty  crusades,  in  soaring  temples,  and  in  the  hearts  of  
worshipers.  Like  people,  gods  run  the  gamut  from  benevolent  to  
malicious,  reserved  to  intrusive,  simple  to  inscrutable.  The  gods,  
however,  work  mostly  through  intermediaries—their  clerics.  Good  
clerics  heal,  protect,  and  avenge.  Evil  clerics  pillage,  destroy,  and  
sabotage.  A  cleric  uses  the  power  of  his  god  to  make  his  god’s  will  
manifest. And if a cleric uses his god’s power to improve his own lot, 
that’s to be expected, too. 
Adventures:   Ideally,   a   cleric’s   adventures   support   his   god’s   
causes,  at  least  in  a  general  way.  A  good  cleric,  for  example,  helps  
those in need. If, through noble acts, he can improve the reputation 
to  his  god  or  temple,  that’s  even  better.  An  evil  cleric  seeks  to  
increase  his  own  power  and  that  of  his  deity,  so  that  others  will  
respect and fear both. 
Clerics  sometimes  receive  orders,  or  at  least  suggestions,  from  
their  ecclesiastical  superiors,  directing  them  to  undertake  missions  
for  the  church.  The  clerics  and  their  companions  are  compensated  
fairly for these missions, and the church may be especially generous 
with the casting of needed spells or divine magic items as payment. 
Of course, clerics are people, too, and they may have any or all the 
more common motivations for adventuring. 
Characteristics:  Clerics  are  masters  of  divine  magic,  which  is  
especially  good  at  healing.  Even  an  inexperienced  cleric  can  bring  
people  back  from  the  brink  of  death,  and  an  experienced  cleric  can  
bring back people who have crossed over that brink. 
As  channelers  of  divine  energy,  clerics  can  affect  undead  crea-
tures.  A  good  cleric  can  turn  away  or  even  destroy  undead;  an  evil  
cleric can bring undead under his control. 
Clerics have some combat training. They can use simple weapons, 
and  they  are  trained  in  the  use  of  armor,  since  armor  does  not  
interfere with divine spells the way it does with arcane spells. 
Alignment:   Like   the   gods   they   serve,   clerics   can   be   of   any   
alignment.  Because  people  more  readily  worship  good  deities  than  
neutral  or  evil  ones,  there  are  more  good  than  evil  clerics.  Clerics  
also tend toward law instead of chaos, since lawful religions tend to 
be  more  structured  and  better  able  to  recruit  and  train  clerics  than  
chaotic ones. 
Typically, a cleric is the same alignment as his deity, though some 
clerics  are  one  step  away  from  their  respective  deities  in  alignment.  
For  example,  most  clerics  of  Heironeous,  the  god  of  valor  (who  is  
lawful good) are lawful good, but some are lawful neutral or neutral 
good.  Additionally,  a  cleric  may  not  be  neutral  (that  is,  neutral  on  
both the good–evil axis and the lawful–chaotic axis) unless his deity 
is neutral. 
Religion: Every reasonably well-known deity has clerics devoted 
to  him  or  her,  so  clerics  can  be  of  any  religion.  The  deity  most  
common worshiped by human clerics in civilized lands is Pelor (god 
of  the  sun).  The  majority  of  nonhuman  clerics  are  devoted  to  the  
chief   god   of   the   appropriate   racial   pantheon.   Most   clerics   are   
officially  ordained  members  of  religious  organizations,  commonly  
called churches. Each has sworn to uphold the ideals of his church. 
Some  clerics  devote  themselves  not  to  a  god  but  to  a  cause  or  a  
source of divine power. These characters wield magic the way clerics 
devoted  to  individual  gods  do,  but  they  are  not  associated  with  any  
religious  institution  or  any  particular  practice  of  worship.  A  cleric  
devoted to good and law, for example, may be on friendly terms with 
the  clerics  of  lawful  and  good  deities  and  may  extol  the  virtues  of  a  
good   and   lawful   life,   but   he   is   not   a   functionary   in   a   church   
hierarchy. 
Background:  Most  clerics  join  their  churches  as  young  adults,  
though  some  are  devoted  to  a  god’s  service  from  a  young  age,  and  a  
few feel the call later in life. While some clerics are tightly bound to 
their churches’ activities on a daily basis, others have more freedom 
to  conduct  their  lives  as  they  please,  as  long  as  they  do  so  in  
accordance with their gods’ wishes. 
Clerics  of  a  given  religion  are  all  supposed  to  get  along,  though  
schisms   within   a   church   are   often   more   bitter   than   conflicts   
between  religions.  Clerics  who  share  some  basic  ideals,  such  as  
goodness  or  lawfulness,  may  find  common  cause  with  each  other  
and  see  themselves  as  part  of  an  order  or  body  that  supersedes  any  
given  religion.  Clerics  of  opposed  goals,  however,  are  sworn  ene-
mies. In civilized lands, open warfare between religions occurs only 
during    civil    wars    and    similar    social    upheavals,    but    vicious    
politicking between opposed churches is common. 
Races:  All  the  common  races  are  represented  in  this  class,  since  
the  need  for  religion  and  divine  magic  is  universal.  The  clerics  of  
most  races,  however,  are  too  focused  on  their  religious  duties  to  
undertake  an  adventurer’s  life.  Crusading,  adventuring  clerics  most  
often come from the human and dwarf races. 
Among   the   savage   humanoids,   clerics   are   less   common.   The   
exception is troglodytes, who take well to divine magic and are often 
led  by  priests,  who  make  a  practice  of  sacrificing  and  devouring  
captives. 
Other Classes: In an adventuring party, the cleric is everybody’s 
friend  and  often  the  glue  that  holds  the  party  together.  As  the  one  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
                                                                                                                                                                                
31
who  can  channel  divine  energy,  a  cleric  is  a  capable  healer,  and  
adventurers  of  every  class  appreciate  being  put  back  together  after  
they’ve   taken   some   hard   knocks.   Clerics   sometimes   clash   with   
druids,  since  druids  represent  an  older,  more  primal  relationship  
between   the   mortal   and   the   divine.   Mostly,   though,   the   
religion   of   a   cleric   determines   how   he   gets   along   with   
others. A cleric of Olidammara (god of thieves), gets along 
fine with rogues and ne’er-do-wells, for example, 
while  a  cleric  of  Heironeous  (god  of  valor)  
rankles at such company. 
Role: The cleric serves as a typical group’s 
primary    healer,    diviner,    and    defensive    
specialist.  He  can  hold  his  own  in  a  fight  
but  usually  isn’t  well  served  by  charging  to  
the  front  of  combat.  The  cleric’s  domains  and  
spell  selection  can  greatly  affect  his  role  as  
well. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Clerics have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:      Wisdom      determines      how      
powerful  a  spell  a  cleric  can  cast,  how  many  
spells  he  can  cast  per  day,  and  how  hard  those  
spells  are  to  resist  (see  Spells,  below).  A  high  
Constitution   score   improves   a   cleric’s   hit   
points,    and    a    high    Charisma    score    
improves his ability to turn undead. 
Alignment: A cleric’s alignment must 
be within one step of his deity’s (that is, it 
may   be   one   step   away   on   either   the   
lawful–chaotic  axis  or  the  good–evil  
axis,  but  not  both).  Exceptions  are  
the   clerics   of   St.   Cuthbert   (a   
lawful   neutral   deity),   who   may   
choose only between lawful good 
and   lawful   neutral   for   their   
alignment.  A  cleric  may  not  
be  neutral  unless  his  deity’s  
alignment is also neutral. 
Hit Die: d8. 
 
Class Skills 
The   cleric’s   class   skills   (and   the   key   ability   for   each   skill)   are   
Concentration  (Con),  Craft  (Int),  Diplomacy  (Cha),  Heal  (Wis),  
Knowledge  (arcana)  (Int),  Knowledge  (history)  (Int),  Knowledge  
(religion) (Int), Knowledge (the planes) (Int), Profession (Wis), and 
Spellcraft (Int).  See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions. 
Domains  and  Class  Skills:  A  cleric  who  chooses  the  Animal  
or  Plant  domain  adds  Knowledge  (nature)  (Int)  to  the  cleric  class  
skills  listed  above.  A  cleric  who  chooses  the  Knowledge  domain  
adds all Knowledge (Int) skills to the list. 
A  cleric  who  chooses  the  Travel  domain  
adds Survival (Wis) to the list. A cleric who 
chooses   the   Trickery   domain   adds   Bluff   
(Cha),  Disguise  (Cha),  and  Hide  (Dex)  to  the  
list.   See   Deity,   Domains,   and   Domain   Spells,   
below, for more information. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int 
modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the cleric. 
Weapon  and  Armor  Proficiency:  Clerics  are  
proficient with all simple weapons, with all types of 
armor  (light,  medium,  and  heavy),  and  
with      shields      (except      tower      
shields). 
Every    deity    has    a    favored    
weapon  (see  Deities,  page  106),  
and his or her clerics consider it 
a  point  of  pride  to  wield  that  
weapon.  A  cleric  who  chooses  
the   War   domain   receives   the   
Weapon Focus feat related to that 
weapon  as  a  bonus  feat.  He  also  
receives    the    appropriate    Martial    
Weapon  Proficiency  feat  as  a  bonus  
feat,   if   the   weapon   falls   into   that   
category.   See   Chapter   5:   Feats   for   
details. 
Table 3–6: The Cleric 
 Base Fort Ref Will ———————— Spells per Day
1
 ——–————— 
Level      Attack      Bonus      Save      Save      Save          Special      0      1st        2nd        3rd        4th        5th        6th        7th      8th      9th      
         1st         +0         +2         +0         +2           Turn         or         rebuke         undead         3         1+1         —         —         —         —         —         —         —         —         
         2nd         +1         +3         +0         +3                    4         2+1         —         —         —         —         —         —         —         —         
         3rd         +2         +3         +1         +3                    4         2+1         1+1         —         —         —         —         —         —         —         
         
4th       +3                          +4         +1          +4            Bonus Feat                          5         3+1       2+1         —          —          —          —          —        —        — 
         5th         +3         +4         +1         +4                    5         3+1         2+1         1+1         —         —         —         —         —         —         
         6th         +4         +5         +2         +5                    5         3+1         3+1         2+1         —         —         —         —         —         —         
       7th       +5       +5         +2         +5                  6         4+1       3+1       2+1       1+1        —         —         —       —       —       
       
8th       +6/+1                    +6          +2         +6             Bonus Feat                        6         4+1        3+1       3+1        2+1        —          —          —       —        — 
       9th      +6/+1                   +6         +3         +6                                                       6         4+1       4+1       3+1       2+1       1+1        —         —       —       —       
10th       +7/+2       +7         +3         +7                  6         4+1       4+1       3+1       3+1       2+1        —         —       —       —       
11th       +8/+3       +7         +3         +7                  6         5+1       4+1       4+1       3+1       2+1       1+1        —       —       —       
12th       +9/+4                     +8          +4          +8              Bonus Feat                         6          5+1        4+1        4+1       3+1        3+1        2+1         —        —        — 
13th      +9/+4                   +8         +4         +8                                                       6         5+1       5+1       4+1       4+1       3+1       2+1       1+1      —       —       
14th       +10/+5       +9         +4         +9                  6         5+1       5+1       4+1       4+1       3+1       3+1       2+1       —       —       
15th      +11/+6/+1            +9         +5        +9                                                    6        5+1       5+1      5+1       4+1      4+1        3+1      2+1     1+1     — 
16th       +12/+7/+2              +10         +5         +10            Bonus Feat                         6          5+1        5+1       5+1        4+1        4+1        3+1       3+1      2+1      — 
17th       +12/+7/+2          +10        +5        +10                 6         5+1       5+1       5+1       5+1       4+1       4+1       3+1       2+1       1+1       
18th       +13/+8/+3          +11        +6        +11                 6         5+1       5+1       5+1       5+1       4+1       4+1       3+1       3+1       2+1       
19th       +14/+9/+4          +11        +6        +11                 6         5+1       5+1       5+1       5+1       5+1       4+1       4+1       3+1       3+1       
20th       +15/+10/+5           +12        +6         +12            Bonus Feat                       6          5+1       5+1        5+1       5+1       5+1        4+1       4+1     4+1     4+1 
1 In addition to the stated number of spells per day for 1st- through 9th-level spells, a cleric gets a domain spell for each spell level, starting at 1st. 
The “+1” in the entries on this table represents that spell. Domain spells are in addition to any bonus spells the cleric may receive for having a 
high Wisdom score. 
Jozan 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
32 
Aura  (Ex):  A  cleric  of  a  chaotic,  evil,  good,  or  lawful  deity  has  a  
particularly  powerful  aura  corresponding  to  the  deity’s  alignment  
(see  the  detect  evil spell for details). Clerics who don’t worship a spe-
cific  deity  but  choose  the  Chaotic,  Evil,  Good,  or  Lawful  domain  
have a similarly powerful aura of the corresponding alignment. 
Spells:  A  cleric  casts  divine  spells  (the  same  type  of  spells  avail-
able  to  the  druid,  paladin,  and  ranger),  which  are  drawn  from  the  
cleric spell list (page 183). However, his alignment may restrict him 
from  casting  certain  spells  opposed  to  his  moral  or  ethical  beliefs;  
see  Chaotic,  Evil,  Good,  and  Lawful  Spells,  below.  A  cleric  must  
choose and prepare his spells in advance (see below). 
To prepare or cast a spell, a cleric must have a Wisdom score equal 
to  at  least  10  +  the  spell  level  (Wis  10  for  0-level  spells,  Wis  11  for  
1st-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving throw 
against  a  cleric’s  spell  is  10  +  the  spell  level  +  the  cleric’s  Wisdom  
modifier. 
Like  other  spellcasters,  a  cleric  can  cast  only  a  certain  number  of  
spells  of  each  spell  level  per  day.  His  base  daily  spell  allotment  is  
given on Table 3–7: The Cleric. In addition, he receives bonus spells 
per  day  if  he  has  a  high  Wisdom  score  (see  Table  1–1:  Ability  
Modifiers  and  Bonus  Spells,  page  8).  A  cleric  also  gets  one  domain  
spell  of  each  spell  level  he  can  cast,  starting  at  1st  level.  When  a  
cleric prepares a spell in a domain spell slot, it must come from one 
of   his   two   domains   (see   Deities,   Domains,   and   Domain   Spells,   
below). 
Clerics  do  not  acquire  their  spells  from  books  or  scrolls,  nor  do  
they prepare them through study. Instead, they meditate or pray for 
their spells, receiving them through their own strength of faith or as 
divine inspiration. Each cleric must choose a time at which he must 
spend  1  hour  each  day  in  quiet  contemplation  or  supplication  to  
regain his daily allotment of spells. Typically, this hour is at dawn or 
noon  for  good  clerics  and  at  dusk  or  midnight  for  evil  ones.  Time  
spent resting has no effect on whether a cleric can prepare spells. A 
cleric  may  prepare  and  cast  any  spell  on  the  cleric  spell  list  (page  
183),  provided  that  he  can  cast  spells  of  that  level,  but  he  must  
choose which spells to prepare during his daily meditation. 
Deity,  Domains,  and  Domain  Spells:  Choose  a  deity  for  your  
cleric.  Sample  deities  are  listed  on  Table  3–7:  Deities  and  described  
on  page  106–108.  The  cleric’s  deity  influences  his  alignment,  what  
magic he can perform, his values, and how others see him. You may 
also choose for your cleric to have no deity. 
If the typical worshipers of a deity include the members of a race, 
a cleric must be of the indicated race to choose that deity as his own. 
(The  god  may  have  occasional  worshipers  of  other  races,  but  not  
clerics.) 
When  you  have  chosen  an  alignment  and  a  deity  for  your  cleric,  
choose  two  domains  from  among  those  given  on  Table  3–7  for  the  
deity.  While  the  clerics  of  a  particular  religion  are  united  in  their  
reverence for their deity, each cleric emphasizes different aspects of 
the  deity’s  interests.  You  can  select  an  alignment  domain  (Chaos,  
Evil, Good, or Law) for your cleric only if his alignment matches that 
domain. 
If  your  cleric  is  not  devoted  to  a  particular  deity,  you  still  select  
two domains to represent his spiritual inclinations and abilities. The 
restriction on alignment domains still applies. 
Each  domain  gives  your  cleric  access  to  a  domain  spell  at  each  
spell  level  he  can  cast,  from  1st  on  up,  as  well  as  a  granted  power.  
Your  cleric  gets  the  granted  powers  of  both  the  domains  selected.  
With  access  to  two  domain  spells  at  a  given  spell  level,  a  cleric  
prepares  one  or  the  other  each  day  in  his  domain  spell  slot.  If  a  
domain  spell  is  not  on  the  cleric  spell  list  (page  183),  a  cleric  can  
prepare  it  only  in  his  domain  spell  slot.  Domain  spells  and  granted  
powers are given in Cleric Domains, pages 185–189. 
For  example,  Jozan  is  a  1st-level  cleric  of  Pelor.  He  chooses  Good  
and  Healing  (from  Pelor’s  domain  options)  as  his  two  domains.  He  
gets  the  granted  powers  of  both  his  selected  domains.  The  Good  
domain  allows  him  to  cast  all  spells  with  the  good  descriptor  at  +1  
caster  level  (as  if  he  were  one  level  higher  as  a  cleric)  as  a  granted  
power,  and  it  gives  him  access  to  protection  from  evil  as  a  1st-level  
domain  spell.  The  Healing  domain  allows  him  to  cast  all  healing  
subschool  spells  of  the  conjuration  school  at  +1  caster  level  as  a  
granted  power,  and  it  gives  him  access  to  cure  light  wounds  as  a  1st-
level  domain  spell.  When  Jozan  prepares  his  spells,  he  gets  one  1st-
level  spell  for  being  a  1st-level  cleric,  one  bonus  1st-level  spell  for  
having   a   high   Wisdom   score   (15),   and   one   domain   spell.   The   
domain  spell  must  be  one  of  the  two  to  which  he  has  access,  either  
protection from evil or cure light wounds. 
Spontaneous  Casting:  A  good  cleric  (or  a  neutral  cleric  of  a  
good  deity)  can  channel  stored  spell  energy  into  healing  spells  that  
the  cleric  did  not  prepare  ahead  of  time.  The  cleric  can  “lose”  any  
prepared  spell  that  is  not  a  domain  spell  in  order  to  cast  any  cure 
spell  of  the  same  spell  level  or  lower  (a  cure  spell  is  any  spell  with  
“cure”  in  its  name).    For  example,  a  good  cleric  who  has  prepared  
command  (a  1st-level  spell)  may  lose  command  in  order  to  cast  cure 
light  wounds  (also  a  1st-level  spell).  Clerics  of  good  deities  can  cast  
cure  spells  in  this  way  because  they  are  especially  proficient  at  
Table 3–7: Deities 
Deity                                                                    Alignment                                                                    Domains                                                                    Typical                                                                    Worshipers                                                                    
Heironeous, god of valor Lawful good Good, Law, War Paladins, fighters, monks 
Moradin, god of the dwarves Lawful good Earth, Good, Law, Protection Dwarves 
Yondalla, goddess of the halflings Lawful good Good, Law, Protection Halflings 
Ehlonna, goddess of the woodlands Neutral good Animal, Good, Plant, Sun Elves, gnomes, half-elves, halflings, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rangers,                                                                             druids                                                                             
Garl Glittergold, god of the gnomes Neutral good Good, Protection, Trickery Gnomes 
Pelor, god of the sun Neutral good Good, Healing, Strength, Sun Rangers, bards 
Corellon Larethian, god of the elves Chaotic good Chaos, Good, Protection, War Elves, half-elves, bards 
Kord, god of Strength Chaotic good Chaos, Good, Luck, Strength Fighters, barbarians, rogues, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       athletes                                                                             
Wee Jas, goddess of death and magic Lawful neutral Death, Law, Magic Wizards, necromancers, sorcerers 
St. Cuthbert, god of retribution Lawful neutral Destruction, Law, Protection, Strength Fighters, monks, soldiers 
Boccob, god of magic Neutral Knowledge, Magic, Trickery Wizards, sorcerers, sages 
Fharlanghn, god of roads Neutral Luck, Protection, Travel Bards, adventurers, merchants 
Obad-Hai, god of nature Neutral Air, Animal, Earth, Fire, Plant, Water Druids, barbarians, rangers 
Olidammara, god of thieves Chaotic neutral Chaos, Luck, Trickery Rogues, bards, thieves 
Hextor, god of tyranny Lawful evil Destruction, Evil, Law, War Evil fighters, monks 
Nerull, god of death Neutral evil Death, Evil, Trickery Evil necromancers, rogues 
Vecna, god of secrets Neutral evil Evil, Knowledge, Magic Evil wizards, sorcerers, rogues, spies 
Erythnul, god of slaughter Chaotic evil Chaos, Evil, Trickery, War Evil fighters, barbarians, rogues 
Gruumsh, god of the orcs Chaotic evil Chaos, Evil, Strength, War Half-orcs, orcs 
 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
33
wielding positive energy. 
An  evil  cleric  (or  a  neutral  cleric  of  an  evil  deity),  on  the  other  
hand,  can’t  convert  prepared  spells  to  cure  spells  but  can  convert  
them to inflict spells (an inflict spell is one with “inflict” in its name). 
A  cleric  who  is  neither  good  nor  evil  and  whose  deity  is  neither  
good  nor  evil  can  convert  spells  to  either  cure  spells  or  inflict  spells  
(player’s choice), depending on whether the cleric is more proficient 
at  wielding  positive  or  negative  energy.  Once  the  player  makes  this  
choice,  it  cannot  be  reversed.  This  choice  also  determines  whether  
the  cleric  turns  or  commands  undead  (see  below).  Exceptions:  All  
lawful  neutral  clerics  of  Wee  Jas  (goddess  of  death  and  magic)  
convert  prepared  spells  to  inflict  spells,  not  cure  spells.  All  clerics  of  
St. Cuthbert (god of retribution) and all nonevil clerics of Obad-Hai 
(god of nature) convert prepared spells to cure spells, not inflict spells. 
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A cleric can’t cast spells 
of an alignment opposed to his own or his deity’s (if he has one). For 
example, a good cleric (or a neutral cleric of a good deity) cannot cast 
evil spells. Spells associated with particular alignments are indicated 
by   the   chaos,   evil,   good,   and   law   descriptors   in   their   spell   
descriptions (see Chapter 11: Spells). 
Turn  or  Rebuke  Undead  (Su):  Any  cleric,  regardless  of  align-
ment,  has  the  power  to  affect  undead  creatures  (such  as  skeletons,  
zombies, ghosts, and vampires) by channeling the power of his faith 
through  his  holy  (or  unholy)  symbol  (see  Turn  or  Rebuke  Undead,  
page 159). 
A  good  cleric  (or  a  neutral  cleric  who  worships  a  good  deity)  can  
turn  or  destroy  undead  creatures.  An  evil  cleric  (or  a  neutral  cleric  
who  worships  an  evil  deity)  instead  rebukes  or  commands  such  
creatures.,  forcing  them  to  cower  in  awe  of  his  power.  If  your  
character  is  a  neutral  cleric  of  a  neutral  deity,  you  must  choose  
whether  his  turning  ability  functions  as  that  of  a  good  cleric  or  an  
evil  cleric.  Once  you  make  this  choice,  it  cannot  be  reversed.  This  
decision  also  determines  whether  the  cleric  can  cast  spontaneous  
cure or inflict spells (see above). Exceptions: All lawful neutral clerics of 
Wee  Jas  (goddess  of  death  and  magic)  rebuke  or  command  undead.  
All clerics of St. Cuthbert (god of retribution) and all nonevil clerics 
of Obad-Hai (god of nature) turn of destroy undead. 
A  cleric  may  attempt  to  turn  undead  a  number  of  times  per  day  
equal to 3 + his Charisma modifier. A cleric with 5 or more ranks in 
Knowledge  (religion)  gets  a  +2  bonus  on  turning  checks  against  
undead. 
Bonus  Languages:  A  cleric’s  bonus  language  options  include  
Celestial,  Abyssal,  and  Infernal  (the  languages  of  good,  chaotic  evil,  
and lawful evil outsiders, respectively). These choices are in addition 
to the bonus languages available to the character because of his race 
(see  Race  and  Languages,  page  12,  and  the  Speak  Language  skill,  
page 82). 
 
Ex-Clerics 
A cleric who grossly violates the code of conduct required by his god 
(generally  by  acting  in  ways  opposed  to  the  god’s  alignment  or  
purposes)  loses  all  spells  and  class  features,  except  for  armor  and  
shield   proficiencies   and   proficiency   with   simple   weapons.   He   
cannot  thereafter  gain  levels  as  a  cleric  of  that  god  until  he  atones  
(see the atonement spell description, page 201). 
 
Human Cleric Starting Package 
Armor:  Scale  mail  (+4  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –4,  speed  20  ft.,  
30 lb.). 
Heavy wooden shield (+2 AC, armor check penalty –2, 10 lb.). 
Weapons: Heavy mace (1d8, crit ×2, 8 lb., one-handed, bludgeon-
ing). 
Light  crossbow  (1d8,  crit  19–20/×2,  range  inc.  80  ft.,  4  lb.,  pierc-
ing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 3 + Int modifier. 
Skill                                          Ranks                                          Ability                                          Armor                                          
Spellcraft                                      4                                      Int                                      —                                      
Concentration                              4                              Con                              —                              
Heal                                             4                                             Wis                                             —                                             
Knowledge (religion) 4 Int — 
Diplomacy                                   4                                   Cha                                   —                                   
Gather Information (cc) 2 Cha — 
Listen (cc) 2 Wis — 
 
Feat: Scribe Scroll. 
Bonus Feat: Alertness. 
Deity/Domains: Pelor/Good and Healing. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, and flint and steel. Case with 10 crossbow bolts. Wooden holy 
symbol (sun disc of Pelor). Three torches. 
Gold: 1d4 gp. 
 
DRUID 
The  fury  of  a  storm,  the  gentle  strength  of  the  morning  sun,  the  
cunning of the fox, the power of the bear—all these and more are at 
the  druid’s  command.  The  druid  however,  claims  no  mastery  over  
nature. That claim, she says, is the empty boast of a city dweller. The 
druid gains her power not by ruling nature but by being at one with 
it. To trespassers in a druid’s sacred grove, and to those who feel her 
wrath, the distinction is overly fine. 
Adventures:  Druids  adventure  to  gain  knowledge  (especially  
about  animals  and  plants  unfamiliar  to  them)  and  power.  Some-
times,  their  superiors  call  on  their  services.  Druids  may  also  bring  
their  power  to  bear  against  those  who  threaten  what  they  love,  
which  more  often  includes  ancient  stands  of  trees  or  trackless  
mountains  than  people.  While  druids  accept  that  which  is  horrific  
or  cruel  in  nature,  they  hate  that  which  is  unnatural,  including  
aberrations  (such  as  beholders  and  carrion  crawlers)  and  undead  
(such as zombies and vampires). Druids sometimes lead raids against 
such   creatures,   especially   when   they   encroach   on   the   druids’   
territory. 
Characteristics:  Druids  cast  divine  spells  much  the  same  way  
clerics  do,  though  most  get  their  spells  from  the  power  of  nature  
rather than from deities. Their spells are oriented toward nature and 
animals.  In  addition  to  spells,  druids  gain  an  increasing  array  of  
magical  powers,  including  the  ability  to  take  the  shapes  of  animals,  
as they advance in level. 
The  armor  of  a  druid  are  restricted  by  traditional  oaths  to  the  
items  noted  in  Weapon  and  Armor  proficiency  (below),All  other  
armor  is  prohibited.  Though  a  druid  could  learn  to  wear  full  plate,  
putting   it   on   would   violate   her   oath   and   suppress   her   druidic   
powers. 
Druids  avoid  carrying  much  worked  metal  with  them  because  it  
interferes  with  the  pure  and  primal  nature  that  they  attempt  to  
embody. 
Alignment:  Druids,  in  keeping  with  nature’s  ultimate  indiffer-
ence,  must  maintain  at  least  some  measure  of  dispassion.  As  such,  
they  must  be  neutral  on  at  least  one  alignment  axis  (chaotic–lawful  
or   good–evil),   if   not   both.   Just   as   nature   encompasses   such   
dichotomies  as  life  and  death,  beauty  and  horror,  and  peace  and  
violence,  so  two  druids  can  manifest  different  or  even  opposite  
alignments  (neutral  good  and  neutral  evil,  for  instance)  and  still  be  
part of the druidic tradition. 
Religion: A druid reveres nature above  all. She gains her magical 
power  either  from  the  force  of  nature  itself  or  from  a  nature  deity.  
The typical druid pursues a mystic spirituality of transcendent union 
with  nature  rather  than  devoting  herself  to  a  divine  entity.  Still,  
some  druids  revere  or  at  least  respect  either  Obad-Hai  (god  of  
nature) or Ehlonna (goddess of the woodlands). 
Background:   Though   their   organization   is   invisible   to   most   
outsiders,  who  consider  druids  to  be  loners,  druids  are  actually  part  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
34 
of   a   society   that   spans   the   land,   ignoring   political   borders.   A   
prospective druid is inducted into this society through secret rituals, 
including  tests  that  not  all  survive.  Only  after  achieving  some  level  
of competence is the druid allowed to strike out on her own. 
All druids are nominally members of this druidic society, though 
some individuals are so isolated that they have never seen any high-
ranking    members    of    the    society    or    participated    in    druidic    
gatherings.  All  druids  recognize  each  other  as  brothers  and  sisters.  
Like  true  creatures  of  the  wilderness,  however,  druids  sometimes  
compete with or even prey on each other. 
A druid may be expected to perform services for 
higher-ranking druids, though proper payment is 
tendered   for   such   assignments.   Likewise,   a   
lower-ranking  druid  may  appeal  for  aid  from  
her  higher-ranking  comrades  in  exchange  for  a  
fair price in coin or service. 
Druids may live in small towns, but they always 
spend  a  good  portion  of  their  time  in  wild  
areas.    Even    large    cities    surrounded    by    
cultivated  land  as  far  as  the  eye  can  see  often  
have    druid    groves    nearby—small,    wild    
refuges  where  druids  live  and  which  they  
protect   fiercely.   Near   coastal   cities,   such   
refuges  may  be  nearby  islands,  where  the  
druids can find the isolation they need. 
Races: Elves and gnomes have an 
affinity  for  natural  lands  and  often  
become  druids.  Humans  and  half-
elves also frequently adopt this path, 
and  druids  are  particularly  common  
among  savage  humans.  Dwarves,  
halflings,     and     half-orcs     are     
rarely druids. 
Few  from  among  the  
brutal  humanoids  are  
inducted  into  drui-
dic  society,  though  
gnolls   have   a   fair   
contingent   of   evil   
druids   among   them.   
Gnoll         druids         are         
accepted,  though  perhaps  not  
welcomed, by druids of other races. 
Other Classes: The druid shares with rangers and 
many   barbarians   a   reverence   for   nature   and   a   familiarity   with   
natural  lands.  She  doesn’t  much  understand  the  urban  mannerism  
typical of a rogue, and she finds arcane magic disruptive and slightly 
distasteful.    The  typical  druid  also  dislikes  the  paladin’s  devotion  to  
abstract  ideals  instead  of  “the  real  world.”  Druids,  however,  are  
nothing  if  not  accepting  of  diversity,  and  they  take  little  offense  at  
other characters, even those very different from them. 
Role:   The   druid   enjoys   extraordinary   versatility.   Though   she   
lacks the sheer healing power of the cleric, she makes up for it with 
additional  offensive  power,  thanks  to  her  spell  selection  and  wild  
shape ability. A druid back up by another secondary healer (such as a 
paladin) can prove extremely valuable to a group of adventurers. Her 
animal companion also provides valuable melee combat support. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Druids have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:  Wisdom  determines  how  powerful  a  spell  a  druid  can  
cast,  how  many  spells  she  can  cast  per  day,  and  how  hard  those  
spells are to resist. To cast a spell, a druid must have a Wisdom score 
of 10 + the spell’s level. A druid gets bonus spells based on Wisdom. 
The  Difficulty  Class  of  a  saving  throw  against  a  druid’s  spell  is  10  +  
the spell’s level + the druid’s Wisdom modifier.  
Since  a  druid  wears  light  or  medium  armor,  a  high  Dexterity  
score greatly improves her defensive ability. 
Alignment:    Neutral    good,    lawful    neutral,    neutral,    chaotic    
neutral, or neutral evil. 
Hit Die: d8. 
 
Class Skills 
The   druid’s   class   skills   (and   the   key   ability   for   each   skill)   are   
Concentration    (Con),    Craft    (Int),    
Diplomacy  (Cha),  Handle  Animal  
(Cha),    Heal    (Wis),    Knowledge    
(nature)       (Int),       Listen       (Wis),       
Profession   (Wis),   Ride   (Dex),   Spellcraft   
(Int),  Spot  (Wis),  Survival  (Wis),  and  Swim  
(Str).        See    Chapter    4:    Skills    for    skill    
descriptions. 
Skill    Points    at    1st    Level:    (4    +    Int    
modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 
+ Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the 
druid. 
Weapon  and  Armor  Proficiency: 
Druids     are     proficient     with     the     
following   weapons:   club,   dagger,   
dart,  quarterstaff,  scimitar,  sickle,  
shortspear,    sling,    and    spear.    
They  are  also  proficient  with  all  
natural attacks (claw, bite, and so forth) 
of any form they assume with wild shape (see 
below). 
Druids    are    proficient    with    light    and    
medium armor but are prohibited from wearing 
metal armor; thus, they may wear only padded, 
leather,  or  hide  armor.  (A  druid  may  also  
wear    wooden    armor    that    has    been    
altered  by  the  ironwood  spell  so  that  it  
functions  as  though  it  were  steel.  See  the  
ironwood   spell   description,   page   246)   Druids   are   
proficient  with  shields  (except  tower  shields)  but  must  use  only  
wooden ones. 
A druid who wears prohibited armor or carries a prohibited shield 
is unable to cast druid spells or use any of her supernatural or spell-
like class abilities while doing so and for 24 hours thereafter. 
Spells:   A   druid   casts   divine   spells   (the   same   type   of   spells   
available  to  the  cleric,  paladin,  and  ranger),  which  are  drawn  from  
the  druid  spell  list  (page  189).  Her  alignment  may  restrict  her  from  
casting  certain  spells  opposed  to  her  moral  or  ethical  beliefs;  see  
Chaotic,  Evil,  Good,  and  Lawful  Spells,  below.  A  druid  must  choose  
and prepare her spells in advance (see below). 
To  prepare  or  cast  a  spell,  the  druid  must  have  a  Wisdom  score  
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Wis 10 for 0-level spells, Wis 11 
for  1st-level  spells,  and  so  forth).  The  Difficulty  Class  for  a  saving  
throw  against  a  druid’s  spell  is  10  +  the  spell  level  +  the  druid’s  
Wisdom modifier. 
Like  other  spellcasters,  a  druid  can  cast  only  a  certain  number  of  
spells  of  each  spell  level  per  day.  Her  base  daily  spell  allotment  is  
given  on  Table  3–8:  The  Druid.  In  addition,  she  receives  bonus  
spells per day if she has a high Wisdom score (see Table 1–1: Ability 
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page8). She does not have access to any 
domain spells or granted powers, as a cleric does. 
Illus. by S. Wood 
Vadania
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
35
A druid prepares and casts spells the way a cleric does, though she 
cannot  lose  a  prepared  spell  to  cast  a  cure  spell  in  its  place  (but  see  
Spontaneous Casting, below). A druid may prepare and cast any spell 
on the druid spell list (page 189), provided that she can cast spells of 
that  level,  but  she  must  choose  which  spells  to  prepare  during  her  
daily meditation. 
Spontaneous  Casting:  A  druid  can  channel  stored  spell  energy  
into  summoning  spells  that  she  hasn’t  prepared  ahead  of  time.  She  
can  “lose”  a  prepared  spell  in  order  to  cast  any  summon  nature’s  ally 
spell  of  the  same  level  or  lower.  For  example,  a  druid  who  has  
prepared repel vermin (a 4th-level spell) may lose repel vermin in order 
to cast summon nature’s ally IV (also a 4th-level spell). 
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A druid can’t cast spells 
of  an  alignment  opposed  to  her  own  or  her  deity’s  (if  she  has  one).  
For  example,  a  neutral  good  druid  cannot  cast  evil  spells.  Spells  
associated  with  particular  alignments  are  indicated  by  the  chaos,  
evil,   good,   and   law   descriptors   in   their   spell   descriptions   (see   
Chapter 11: Spells). 
Bonus  Languages:  A  druid’s  bonus  language  options  include  
Sylvan,   the   language   of   woodland   creatures.   This   choice   is   in   
addition to the bonus languages available to the character because of 
her race (see Race and Languages, page 12, and the Speak Language 
skill, page 82). 
A  druid  also  knows  Druidic,  a  secret  language  known  only  to  
druids, which she learns upon becoming a 1st-level druid. Druidic is 
a  free  language  for  a  druid;  that  is,  she  knows  it  in  addition  to  her  
regular allotment of languages and it doesn’t take up a language slot. 
Druids  are  forbidden  to  teach  this  language  to  nondruids.  Druidic  
has its own alphabet. 
Animal  Companion  (Ex):  A  druid  may  begin  play  with  an  
animal  companion  selected  from  the  following  list:  badger,  camel,  
dire  rat,  dog,  riding  dog,  eagle,  hawk,  horse  (light  or  heavy),  owl,  
pony, snake (Small or Medium viper), or wolf. If the DM’s campaign 
takes place wholly or partly in an aquatic environment, the DM may 
add  the  following  creatures  to  the  druid’s  list  of  options:  crocodile,  
porpoise,   Medium   shark,   and   squid.   This   animal   is   a   loyal   
companion   that   accompanies   the   druid   on   her   adventures   as   
appropriate for its kind. 
A  1st-level  druid’s  companion  is  completely  typical  for  its  kind  
except  as  noted  in  the  sidebar  on  page  36.  As  a  druid  advances  in  
level,  the  animal’s  power  increases  as  shown  on  the  table  in  the  
sidebar. 
If  a  druid  releases  her  companion  from  service,  she  may  gain  a  
new  one  by  performing  a  ceremony  requiring  24  uninterrupted  
hours  of  prayer.  This  ceremony  can  also  replace  an  animal  com-
panion that has perished. 
A  druid  of  4th  level  or  higher  may  select  from  alternative  lists  of  
animals  (see  the  sidebar).  Should  she  select  an  animal  companion  
from  one  of  these  alternative  lists,  the  creature  gains  abilities  as  if  
the character’s druid level were lower than it actually is. Subtract the 
value  indicated  in  the  appropriate  list  header  from  the  character’s  
druid level and compare the result with the druid level entry on the 
table in the sidebar to determine the animal companion’s powers. (If 
this  adjustment  would  reduce  the  druid’s  effective  level  to  0  or  
lower,  she  can’t  have  that  animal  as  a  companion.)    For  example,  a  
6th-level  druid  could  select  a  leopard  as  an  animal  companion.  The  
leopard  would  have  characteristics  and  special  abilities  as  if  the  
druid were 3rd level (taking into account the –3 adjustment) instead 
of 6th level. 
Nature  Sense  (Ex):  A  druid  gains  a  +2  bonus  on  Knowledge  
(nature) and Survival checks. 
Wild  Empathy  (Ex):  A  druid  can  use  body  language,  vocaliza-
tions, and demeanor to improve the attitude of an animal (such as a 
bear or a monitor lizard). This ability functions just like a Diplomacy 
check  made  to  improve  the  attitude  of  a  person  (see  Chapter  4:  
Skills).  The  druid  rolls  1d20  and  adds  her  druid  level  and  her  
Charisma modifier to determine the wild empathy check result. The 
typical  domestic  animal  has  a  starting  attitude  of  indifferent,  while  
wild animals are usually unfriendly. 
To  use  wild  empathy,  the  druid  and  the  animal  must  be  able  to  
study  each  other,  which  means  that  they  must  be  within  30  feet  of  
one  another  under  normal  conditions.  Generally,  influencing  an  
animal in this way takes 1 minute but, as with influencing people, it 
might take more or less time. 
A druid can also use this ability to influence a magical beast with 
an  Intelligence  score  of  1  or  2  (such  as  a  basilisk  or  a  girallon),  but  
she takes a –4 penalty on the check. 
Table 3–8: The Druid 
 Base Fort Ref Will ———————————— Spells per Day ——–————————— 
Level        Attack        Bonus          Save        Save        Save        Special        0          1st        2nd        3rd        4th        5th        6th        7th        8th        9th        
         1st         +0         +2         +0         +2         Animal         companion,           3           1          —         —         —         —         —          —         —         —         
      nature sense, wild empathy 
         2nd         +1         +3         +0         +3         Woodland         stride         4           2          —         —         —         —         —          —         —         —         
         3rd         +2         +3         +1         +3         Trackless         step         4           2           1          —         —         —         —          —         —         —         
         4th         +3         +4         +1         +4         Resist         nature’s         lure            5           3           2          —         —         —         —          —         —         —         
         5th         +3         +4         +1         +4         Wild         shape         (1/day)            5           3           2           1          —         —         —          —         —         —         
         6th         +4         +5         +2         +5         Wild         shape         (2/day)
,BF       5           3            3           2          —         —         —          —       —       —         
            7th            +5            +5            +2            +5            Wild            shape            (3/day)             6            4            3            2            1            —            —            —            —            —            
            8th            +6/+1            +6            +2            +6            Wild            shape            (Large)             6            4            3            3            2            —            —            —            —            —            
            9th            +6/+1            +6            +3            +6            Venom            immunity                6            4            4            3            2            1            —            —            —            —            
10th            +7/+2            +7            +3            +7            Wild            shape            (4/day)             6            4            4            3            3            2            —            —            —            —            
11th            +8/+3            +7            +3            +7            Wild            shape            (Tiny)               6            5            4            4            3            2            1            —            —            —            
12th            +9/+4            +8            +4            +8            Wild            shape            (plant)
, BF        6            5            4            4            3            3            2           —            —            —            
13th            +9/+4            +8            +4            +8            A            thousand            faces            6            5            5            4            4            3            2             1            —            —            
14th            +10/+5            +9            +4            +9            Wild            shape            (5/day)             6            5            5            4            4            3            3             2            —            —            
15th            +11/+6/+1            +9            +5            +9                        Timeless            body,            6            5            5            5            4            4            3             2            1            —            
                                                                                    wild              shape              (Huge)              
16th            +12/+7/+2                +10            +5            +10            Wild            shape            6            5            5            5            4            4            3             3            2            —            
                                                                              (elemental             1/day)             
17th            +12/+7/+2                +10            +5            +10                        6            5            5            5            5            4            4             3            2            1            
18th            +13/+8/+3                +11            +6            +11            Wild            shape            (6/day,             6            5            5            5            5            4            4             3            3            2            
                                                                                    
elemental  2/day), BF
19th            +14/+9/+4                +11            +6            +11                        6            5            5            5            5            5            4             4            3            3            
20th            +15/+10/+5              +12            +6            +12            Wild            shape            (elemental            6            5            5            5            5            5            4             4            4            4            
                                                                                    3/day,              Huge              elemental)              
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
36 
Woodland  Stride  (Ex):  Starting  at  2nd  level,  a  druid  may  move  
through  any  sort  of  undergrowth  (such  as  natural  thorns,  briars,  
overgrown  areas,  and  similar  terrain)  at  her  normal  speed  and  with-
out  taking  damage  or  suffering  any  other  impairment.  However,  
thorns,   briars,   and   overgrown   areas   that   have   been   magically   
manipulated to impede motion still affect her. 
Trackless  Step  (Ex):  Starting  at  3rd  level,  a  druid  leaves  no  trail  
in  natural  surroundings  and  cannot  be  tracked.  She  may  choose  to  
leave a trail if so desired. 
 
THE DRUID’S ANIMAL COMPANION 
A druid’s animal companion is different from a normal animal of its kind
in  many  ways.  The  companion  is  treated  as  a  magical  beast,  not  an
animal,  for  the  purpose  of  all  effects  that  depend  on  its  type  (though  it  
retains an animal’s HD, base attack bonus, saves, skill points, and feats).
It  is  superior  to  a  normal  animal  of  its  kind  and  has  special  powers,  as
described below. 
 
Class             Bonus             Natural             Str/Dex             Bonus             
Level                HD                Armor                Adj.                Adj.                Tricks                Special 
1st–2nd  +0 +0 +0 1 Link, share spells
3rd–5th  +2 +2 +1 2 Evasion 
6th–8th  +4 +4 +2 3 Devotion 
9th–11th  +6 +6 +3 4 Multiattack 
12th–14th  +8 +8 +4 5  
15th–17th  +10 +10 +5 6 Improved evasion
18th–20th  +12 +12 +6 7  
 
Animal  Companion  Basics:  Use  the  base  statistics  for  a  creature  of  the
companion’s  kind,  as  given  in  the  Monster  Manual,  but  make  the  
following changes. 
Class  Level:  The  character’s  druid  level.  The  druid’s  class  levels  stack
with levels of any other classes that are entitled to an animal companion
(such  as  the  ranger)  such  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  compan-
ion’s abilities and the alternative lists available to the character. 
Bonus  HD:  Extra  eight-sided  (d8)  Hit  Dice,  each  of  which  gains  a
Constitution modifier, as normal. Remember that extra Hit Dice improve 
the animal companion’s base attack and base save bonuses. An animal
companion’s base attack bonus is the same as that of a druid of a level
equal to the animal’s HD. An animal companion has good Fortitude and
Reflex saves (treat it as a character whose level equals the animal’s HD).
An  animal  companion  gains  additional  skill  points  and  feats  for  bonus
HD  as  normal  for  advancing  a  monster’s  Hit  Dice  (see  the  Monste
r 
Manual). 
Natural Armor Adj.: The number noted here is an improvement to the
animal companion’s existing natural armor bonus. 
Str/Dex Adj.: Add this value to the animal companion’s Strength and
Dexterity scores. 
Bonus  Tricks:  The  value  given  in  this  column  is  the  total  number  o
f
“bonus”  tricks  that  the  animal  knows  in  addition  to  any that  the  druid  
might  choose  to  teach  it  (see  the  Handle  Animal  skill,  page  74).  These
bonus  tricks  don’t  require  any  training  time  or  Handle  Animal  checks,
and  they  don’t  count  against  the  normal  limit  of  tricks  known  by  the
animal.  The  druid  selects  these  bonus  tricks,  and  once  selected,  they
can’t be changed. 
Link (Ex): A druid can handle her animal companion as a free action,
or  push  it  as  a  move  action,  even  if  she  doesn’t  have  any  ranks  in  the
Handle Animal skill. The druid gains a +4 circumstance bonus on all wild 
empathy  checks  and  Handle  Animal  checks  made  regarding  an  animal
companion. 
Share  Spells  (Ex):  At  the  druid’s  option,  she  may  have  any  spell  (but
not  any  spell-like  ability)  she  casts  upon  herself  also  affect  her  animal
companion.  The  animal  companion  must  be  within  5  feet  of  her  at  the
time of casting to receive the benefit. If the spell or effect has a duration
other than instantaneous, it stops affecting the animal companion if the
companion moves farther than 5 feet away and will not affect the animal 
again,  even  if  it  returns  to  the  druid  before  the  duration  expires.
Additionally,  the  druid  may  cast  a  spell  with  a  target  of  “You”  on  her
animal companion (as a touch range spell) instead of on herself. A druid
and  her  animal  companion  can  share  spells  even  if  the  spells  normally
do not affect creatures of the companion’s type (animal). 
Evasion  (Ex):If  an  animal  companion  is  sub
jected  to  an  attack  that  
normally  allows  a  Reflex  saving  throw  for  half  damage,  it  takes  no  
damage if it makes a successful saving throw. 
Devotion  (Ex):An  animal  companion’s  devotion  to  its  master  is  so  
complete   that   it   gains   a   +4   morale   bonus   on   Will   saves   against   
enchantment spells and effects. 
Multiattack:An animal companion gains Multiattack as a bonus feat i
f 
it has three or more natural attacks (see the Monster Manualfor details 
on this feat) and does not already have that feat. If it does not have the 
requisite  three  or  more  natural  attacks,  the  animal  companion  instead  
gains  a  second  attack  with  its  primary  natural  weapon,  albeit  at  a  –5  
penalty. 
Improved  Evasion  (Ex):When  sub
jected  to  an  attack  that  normally  
allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, an animal companion takes 
no damage if it makes a successful saving throw and only half damage i
f 
the saving throw fails. 
 
ALTERNATIVE ANIMAL COMPANIONS 
As explained in the text on page 35, a druid of sufficiently high level can 
select her animal companion from one of the following lists, applying the 
indicated  adjustment  to  the  druid’s  level  (in  parentheses)  for  purposes  
of determining the companion’s characteristics and special abilities. 
 
4th Level or Higher (Level –3) 
Ape (animal) Dire weasel 
Bear, black (animal) Leopard (animal) 
Bison (animal) Lizard, monitor (animal) 
Boar (animal) Shark, Large
1
 (animal) 
Cheetah (animal) Snake, constrictor (animal) 
Crocodile (animal)
1
 Snake, Large viper (animal) 
Dire badger Wolverine (animal) 
Dire bat 
 
7th Level or Higher (Level –6) 
Bear, brown (animal) Dire wolverine 
Crocodile, giant (animal) Elasmosaurus
1
 (dinosaur) 
Deinonychus (dinosaur) Lion (animal) 
Dire ape Rhinoceros (animal) 
Dire boar Snake, Huge viper (animal) 
Dire wolf Tiger (animal) 
 
10th Level or Higher (Level –9) 
Bear, polar (animal) Shark, Huge
1
 (animal) 
Dire lion Snake, giant constrictor (animal) 
Megaraptor (dinosaur) Whale, orca
1
 (animal) 
 
13th Level or Higher (Level –12) 
Dire bear Elephant (animal) 
Octopus, giant
1
 (animal) 
 
16th Level or Higher (Level –15) 
Dire shark
1
                                             Triceratops                                             (dinosaur)                                             
Dire tiger Tyrannosaurus (dinosaur) 
Squid, giant
1
 (animal) 
 
1 Available only in an aquatic environment. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
37
Resist  Nature’s  Lure  (Ex):  Starting  at  4th  level,  a  druid  gains  a  
+4 bonus on saving throws against the spell-like abilities of fey (such 
as dryads, pixies, and sprites). 
Wild  Shape  (Su):  At  5th  level,  a  druid  gains  the  ability  to  turn  
herself  into  any  Small  or  Medium  animal  and  back  again  once  per  
day. Her options for new forms include all creatures with the animal 
type  (see  the  Monster  Manual).  This  ability  functions  like  the  poly-
morph  spell,  except  as  noted  here.  The  effect  lasts  for  1  hour  per  
druid level, or until she changes back. Changing form (to animal or 
back)   is   a   standard   action   and   doesn’t   provoke   an   attack   of   
opportunity. 
The  form  chosen  must  be  that  of  an  animal  the  druid  is  familiar  
with.  For  example,  a  druid  who  has  never  been  outside  a  temperate  
forest could not become a polar bear. 
A  druid  loses  her  ability  to  speak  while  in  animal  form  because  
she  is  limited  to  the  sounds  that  a  normal,  untrained  animal  can  
make, but she can communicate normally with other animals of the 
same  general  grouping  as  her  new  form.  (The  normal  sound  a  wild  
parrot  makes  is  a  squawk,  so  changing  to  this  form  does  not  permit  
speech.) 
A  druid  can  use  this  ability  more  times  per  day  at  6th,  7th,  10th,  
14th,  and  18th  level,  as  noted  on  Table  3–8:  The  Druid.  In  addition,  
she gains the ability to take the shape of a Large animal at 8th level, a 
Tiny animal at 11th level, and a Huge animal at 15th level. The new 
form’s Hit Dice can’t exceed the character’s druid level. For instance, 
a druid can’t take the form of a dire bear (a Large creature that always 
has  at  least  12  HD)  until  12th  level,  even  though  she  can  begin  
taking Large forms at 8th level. 
At 12th level, a druid becomes able to use wild shape to change 
into  a  plant  creature,  such  as  a  shambling  mound,  with  the  
same  size  restrictions  as  for  animal  forms.  (A  druid  can’t  use  
this  ability  to  take  the  form  of  a  plant  that  isn’t  a  creature,  
such as a tree or a rose bush.) 
At  16th  level,  a  druid  becomes  able  to  use  wild  shape  
to  change  into  a  Small,  Medium,  or  Large  elemental  
(air,   earth,   fire,   or   water)   once   per   day.   These   
elemental forms are in addition to her normal wild 
shape  usage.  In  addition  to  the  normal  effects  of  
wild   shape,   the   druid   gains   all   the   elemental’s   
extraordinary,  supernatural,  and  spell-like  abilities.  
She  also  gains  the  elemental’s  feats  for  as  long  as  
she  maintains  the  wild  shape,  but  she  retains  her  
own creature type (humanoid, in most cases). 
At  18th  level,  a  druid  becomes  able  to  assume  
elemental  form  twice  per  day,  and  at  20th  level  
she  can  do  so  three  times  per  day.  At  20th  
level,  a  druid  may  use  this  wild  shape  ability  
to change into a Huge elemental. 
Venom  Immunity  (Ex):  At  9th  level,  a  
druid gains immunity to all poisons.  
A Thousand Faces (Su): At 13th level, a 
druid  gains  the  ability  to  change  
her  appearance  at  will,  as  if  using  
the alter  self  spell  (page  197),  but  
only while in her normal form. 
Timeless    Body    (Ex):    After    
attaining  15th  level,  a  druid  no  
longer     takes     ability     score     
penalties  for  aging  (see  Table  
6–5:  Aging  Effects,  page  109)  and  
cannot  be  magically  aged.  Any  penalties  
she  may  have  already  incurred,  however,  remain  in  place.  Bonuses  
still accrue, and the druid still dies of old age when her time is up. 
 
Ex-Druids 
A   druid   who   ceases   to   revere   nature,   changes   to   a   prohibited   
alignment,  or  teaches  the  Druidic  language  to  a  nondruid  loses  all  
spells  and  druid  abilities  (including  her  animal  companion,  but  not  
including  weapon,  armor,  and  shield  proficiencies).  She  cannot  
thereafter  gain  levels  as  a  druid  until  she  atones  (see  the  atonement 
spell description, page 201). 
 
Half-Elf Druid Starting Package 
Armor: Hide (+3 AC, armor check penalty –3, speed 20 ft., 25 lb.). 
Heavy wooden shield (+2 AC, armor check penalty –2, 10 lb.). 
Weapons:   Scimitar   (1d6,   crit   18–20/×2,   4   lb.,   one-handed,   
slashing). 
Club   (oaken   cudgel):   (1d6,   crit   ×2,   10   ft.,   3   lb.,   one-handed,   
bludgeoning). 
Sling (1d4, crit ×2, rang inc. 50 ft., 0 lb., Medium, Bludgeoning). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 4 + Int modifier. 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Spellcraft                                      4                                      Int                                      —                                      
Concentration                              4                              Con                              —                              
Survival                                        4                                        Wis                                        —                                        
Heal                                             4                                             Wis                                             —                                             
Handle Animal 4 Cha — 
Knowledge (nature) 4 Int — 
Listen                                           4                                           Wis                                           —                                           
Spot                                             4                                             Wis                                             —
 
 
Feat: Scribe Scroll. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack,  and  flint  and  steel.  Pouch  with  10  sling  bullets.  Holly  and  
mistletoe. Three torches. 
Animal  Companion:  Wolf  (see  the  Monster 
Manual for details). 
Gold: 1d6 gp. 
 
FIGHTER 
The questing knight, the conquering 
overlord,  the  king’s  champion,  the  
elite   foot   soldier,   the   hardened   
mercenary,  and  the  bandit  king—
all  are  fighters.  Fighters  can  be  
stalwart   defenders   of   those   in   
need,  cruel  marauders,  or  gutsy  
adventurers.  Some  are  among  
the  land’s  best  souls,  willing  to  
face  death  for  the  greater  good.  
Others are among the worst, with 
no qualms about killing for private 
gain,   or   even   for   sport.   Fighters   
who  are  not  actively  adventuring  
may        be        soldiers,        guards,        
bodyguards,         champions,         or         
criminal    enforcers.    An    adven-
turing  fighter  might  call  himself  a  warrior,  a  
mercenary, a thug, or simply an adventurer. 
Adventures:  Most  fighters  see  adven-
tures,  raids,  and  dangerous  missions  as  
their  job.  Some  have  patrons  who  pay  
them  regularly.  Others  prefer  to  live  
like   prospectors,   taking   great   risks   in   
hopes  of  the  big  haul.  Some  fighters  are  more  
civic-minded  and  use  their  combat  skills  to  protect  endangered  
people   who   cannot   defend   themselves.   Whatever   their   initial   
motivations,  however,  fighters  often  wind  up  living  for  the  thrill  of  
combat and adventure. 
Characteristics:  Of  all  classes,  fighters  have  the  best  all-around  
fighting capabilities (hence the name). Fighters are familiar with all 
the  standard  weapons  and  armors.  In  addition  to  general  fighting  
Tordek 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
38 
prowess,  each  fighter  develops  particular  specialties  of  his  own.  A  
given   fighter   may   be   especially   capable   with   certain   weapons,   
another  might  be  trained  to  execute  specific  fancy  maneuvers.  As  
fighters  gain  experience,  they  get  more  opportunities  to  develop  
their  fighting  skills.  Thanks  to  their  focus  on  combat  maneuvers,  
they can master the most difficult ones relatively quickly. 
Alignment: Fighters may be of any alignment. Good fighters are 
often  crusading  types  who  seek  out  and  fight  evil.  Lawful  fighters  
may  be  champions  who  protect  the  land  and  its  people.  Chaotic  
fighters  may  be  wandering  mercenaries.  Evil  fighters  tend  to  be  
bullies  and  petty  villains  who  simply  take  what  they  want  by  
brute force. 
Religion:  Fighters  often  worship  Heironeous  (god  of  valor),  
Kord   (god   of   strength),   St.   Cuthbert   (god   of   retribution),   
Hextor  (god  of  tyranny),  or  Erythnul  (god  of  slaughter).  
A   fighter   may   style   himself   as   a   crusader   in   the   
service of his god, or he may just want someone to 
pray  to  before  putting  his  life  on  the  line  yet  
another time. 
Background:     Fighters     come     to     their     
profession  in  many  ways.  Most  have  had  
formal  training  in  a  noble’s  army  or  at  
least   in   the   local   militia.   Some   have   
trained  in  formal  academies.  Others  are  
self-taught—unpolished       but       well       
tested. A fighter may have taken up the 
sword  as  a  way  to  escape  
the  limits  of  life  on  
the  farm,  or  he  may  be  
following  a  proud  family  
tradition.   Fighters   share   no   
special identity. They do not see 
themselves      as      a      group      or      
brotherhood.  Those  who  hail  from  a  
particular    academy,    mercenary    com-
pany, or lord’s regiment, however, share a 
certain camaraderie. 
Races:     Human     fighters     are     usually     
veterans  of  some  military  service,  typically  from  
more    mundane    parents.    Dwarf    fighters    are    
commonly  former  members  of  the  well-trained  
strike    teams    that    protect    the    underground    
dwarven  kingdoms.  They  are  typically  members  
of  warrior  families  that  can  trace  their  lineages  
back for millennia, and they may have rivalries or 
alliances  with  other  dwarf  fighters  of  a  different  
lineage.  Elf  fighters  are  typically  skilled  with  the  
longsword.   They   are   proud   of   their   ability   at   
swordplay  and  eager  to  demonstrate  or  test  it.  
Half-orc   fighters   are   often   self-
taught outcasts who have achieved 
enough    skill    to    earn    recognition    and    
something    akin    to    respect.    Gnome    and    
halfling fighters usually stay in their own communities as part of the 
area  militia  rather  than  adventuring.  Half-elves  are  rarely  fighters,  
but they may take up swordplay in honor of the elven tradition. 
Among  the  brutal  humanoids,  few  can  manage  the  discipline  it  
takes  to  be  a  true  fighter.  The  militaristic  hobgoblins,  however,  
produce quite a number of strong and skilled fighters. 
Other Classes: The fighter excels in a straight fight, but he relies 
on others for magical support, healing, and scouting. On a team, it is 
his job to man the front lines, protect the other party members, and 
bring  the  tough  opponents  down.  Fighters  might  not  understand  
the  arcane  ways  of  wizards  or  share  the  faith  of  clerics,  but  they  
recognize the value of teamwork. 
Role:  In  most  adventuring  parties,  the  fighter  serves  as  a  melee  
combatant,  charging  into  the  fray  while  his  comrades  support  him  
with  spells,  ranged  attacks,  and  other  effects.  Fighters  who  favor  
ranged  combat  can  prove  very  deadly,  though  without  other  melee  
support,  they  can  find  themselves  in  front-line  combat  more  often  
than they might prefer. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Fighters have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:  Strength  is  especially  important  for  fighters  because  it  
improves   their   melee   attack   and   damage   rolls.   Constitution   is   
important  for  giving  fighters  lots  of  hit  points,  which  they  need  in  
their many battles. Dexterity is important for fighters who want 
to  be  good  archers  or  who  want  access  to  certain  Dexterity-
oriented  feats,  but  the  heavy  armor  that  fighters  usually  wear  
reduces  the  benefit  of  a  
very       high       Dexterity       
score. 
Alignment: Any. 
Hit Die: d10. 
 
Class Skills 
The  fighter’s  class  skills  (and  
the  key  ability  for  each  skill)  
are    Climb    (Str),    Craft    (Int),    
Handle            Animal            (Cha),            
Intimidate    (Cha),    Jump    (Str),    
Ride  (Dex),  and  Swim  (Str).  See  
Chapter      4:      Skills      for      skill      
descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int 
modifier) × 4. 
Skill  Points  at  Each  Additional  
Level: 2 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All  of  the  following  are  class  features  of  the  
fighter. 
Weapon    and    Armor    Proficiency:    A    
fighter   is   proficient   with   all   simple   and   
martial    weapons    and    with    all    armor    (heavy,    
medium,  and  light)  and  shields  (including  tower  
shields). 
Bonus  Feats:  At  1st  level,  a  fighter  gets  a  bonus  
combat-oriented  feat  in  addition  to  the  feat  that  
any  1st-level  character  gets  and  the  bonus  feat  
granted  to  a  human  character.  The  fighter  
gains an additional bonus feat at 2nd level 
and  every  two  fighter  levels  thereafter  
(4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, 
18th, and 20th). These bonus feats 
must  be  drawn  from  the  feats  noted  as  fighter  bonus  
feats  on  Table  5–1:  Feats  (page  90).  A  fighter  must  still  
meet  all  prerequisites  for  a  bonus  feat,  including  ability  
score  and  base  attack  bonus  minimums.  (See  Chapter  5:  
Feats for descriptions of feats and their prerequisites.) 
These bonus feats are in addition to the feat that a character of any 
class  gets  from  advancing  levels  (see  Table  3–2:  Experience  and  
Level-Dependent  Benefits,  page  22).  A  fighter  is  not  limited  to  the  
list of fighter bonus feats when choosing these feats. 
 
Dwarf Fighter Starting Package 
Armor:  Scale  mail  (+4  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –4,  speed  20  ft.,  
30 lb.). 
Heavy wooden shield (+2 AC, armor check penalty –2, 10 lb.) 
Weapons:  Dwarven  waraxe  (1d10,  crit  ×3,  8  lb.,  one-handed,  
slashing). 
Shortbow (1d6, crit ×3, range inc. 60 ft., 2 lb., piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 2 + Int modifier. 
Illus. by T. Lockwood 
Regdar
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
39
Table 3–9: The Fighter 
                  Base                  Fort                  Ref                  Will                  
Level          Attack          Bonus          Save          Save          Save          Special          
  1st  +1  +2  +0  +0  Bonus  feat  
 2nd +2 +3 +0 +0 Bonus  feat 
  3rd  +3  +3  +1  +1    
  4th  +4  +4  +1  +1  Bonus  feat  
  5th  +5  +4  +1  +1    
  6th  +6/+1  +5  +2  +2  Bonus  feat  
  7th  +7/+2  +5  +2  +2    
  8th  +8/+3  +6  +2  +2  Bonus  feat  
  9th  +9/+4  +6  +3  +3    
10th           +10/+5           +7              +3              +3           Bonus           feat           
11th           +11/+6/+1           +7              +3              +3                      
12th           +12/+7/+2           +8              +4              +4           Bonus           feat           
13th           +13/+8/+3           +8              +4              +4                      
14th           +14/+9/+4           +9              +4              +4           Bonus           feat           
15th           +15/+10/+5               +9              +5              +5                      
16th           +16/+11/+6/+1           +10             +5              +5           Bonus           feat           
17th           +17/+12/+7/+2           +10             +5              +5                      
18th           +18/+13/+8/+3           +11             +6              +6           Bonus           feat           
19th           +19/+14/+9/+4           +11             +6              +6                      
20th           +20/+15/+10/+5           +12             +6              +6           Bonus           feat
 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Climb                                           4                                           Str                                           –6                                           
Jump                                            4                                            Str                                            –6                                            
Ride                                              4                                              Dex                                              —                                              
Swim                                            4                                            Str                                            –12                                            
Intimidate                                    4                                    Cha                                    —                                    
Listen (cc) 2 Wis — 
Search (cc) 2 Int — 
Spot (cc) 2 Wis —
 
 
Feat: Weapon Focus (dwarven waraxe). 
Bonus  Feat  (Fighter): If Strength is 13 or higher, Power Attack; 
if Strength is 12 or lower, Improved Initiative instead. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, flint and steel, quiver with 20 arrows. 
Gold: 4d4 gp. 
 
Human Fighter Starting Package 
Armor:  Scale  mail  (+4  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –4,  speed  20  ft.,  
30 lb.). 
Weapons:  Greatsword  (2d6,  crit  19–20/×2,  8  lb.,  two-handed,  
slashing). 
Shortbow (1d6, crit ×3, 60 ft., 2 lb., piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 3 + Int modifier. 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Climb                                           4                                           Str                                           –4                                           
Jump                                            4                                            Str                                            –4                                            
Ride                                              4                                              Dex                                              —                                              
Swim                                            4                                            Str                                            –8                                            
Intimidate                                    4                                    Cha                                    —                                    
Listen (cc) 2 Wis — 
Search (cc) 2 Int — 
Spot (cc) 2 Wis —
 
 
Feat: Weapon Focus (greatsword). 
Bonus  Feat  (Fighter): If Strength is 13 or higher, Power Attack; 
if Strength is 12 or lower, Improved Initiative instead. 
Bonus Feat (Human): Blind-Fight. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, flint and steel, quiver with twenty arrows. 
Gold: 2d4 gp. 
 
MONK 
Dotted across the landscape are monasteries—small, walled cloisters 
inhabited by monks who pursue personal perfection through action 
as  well  as  contemplation.  They  train  themselves  to  be  versatile  
warriors   skilled   at   fighting   without   weapons   or   armor.   The   
inhabitants   of   monasteries   headed   by   good   masters   serve   as   
protectors  of  the  people.  Ready  for  battle  even  when  barefoot  and  
dressed  in  peasant  clothes,  monks  can  travel  unnoticed  among  the  
populace,  catching  bandits,  warlords,  and  corrupt  nobles  unawares.  
In contrast, the residents of monasteries headed by evil masters rule 
the  surrounding  lands  through  fear,  as  an  evil  warlord  and  his  
entourage  might.  Evil  monks  make  ideal  spies,  infiltrators,  and  
assassins. 
The   individual   monk   is   unlikely   to   care   passionately   about   
championing  commoners  or  amassing  wealth.  She  cares  primarily  
for  the  perfection  of  her  art  and,  thereby,  her  personal  perfection.  
Her goal is to achieve a state that is beyond the mortal realm.  
Adventures:  A  monk  approaches  an  adventure  as  if  it  were  a  
personal test. While not prone to showing off, monks are willing to 
try  their  skills  against  whatever  obstacles  confront  them.  They  are  
not greedy for material wealth, but they eagerly seek that which can 
help them perfect their art. 
Characteristics:  The  key  feature  of  the  monk  is  her  ability  to  
fight unarmed and unarmored. Thanks to her rigorous training, she 
can  strike  as  hard  as  if  she  were  armed  and  strike  faster  than  a  
warrior with a sword. 
Though  a  monk  casts  no  spells,  she  has  a  magic  of  her  own.  She  
channels  a  subtle  energy,  called  ki,  which  allows  her  to  perform  
amazing  feats.  The  monk’s  best-known  feat  is  her  ability  to  stun  an  
opponent  with  an  unarmed  blow.  A  monk  also  has  a  preternatural  
awareness  that  allows  her  to  dodge  an  attack  even  if  she  is  not  con-
sciously aware of it. 
As  the  monk  gains  experience  and  power,  her  mundane  and  ki-
oriented  abilities  grow,  giving  her  more  and  more  power  over  her-
self and, sometimes, over others. 
Alignment:  A  monk’s  training  requires  strict  discipline.  Only  
those who are lawful at heart are capable of undertaking it. 
Religion:  A  monk’s  training  is  her  spiritual  path.  She  is  inner-
directed  and  capable  of  a  private,  mystic  connection  to  the  spiritual  
world,  so  she  needs  neither  clerics  nor  gods.  Certain  lawful  gods,  
however,  may  appeal  to  monks,  who  may  meditate  on  the  gods’  
likenesses and attempt to emulate their deeds. The three most likely 
candidates  for  a  monk’s  devotion  are  Heironeous  (god  of  valor),  St.  
Cuthbert (god of retribution), and Hextor (god of tyranny). 
Background:   A   monk   typically   trains   in   a   monastery.   Most   
monks  were  children  when  they  joined  the  monastery,  sent  to  live  
there  when  their  parents  died,  when  there  wasn’t  enough  food  to  
support  them,  or  in  return  for  some  kindness  that  the  monastery  
had  performed  for  the  family.  Life  in  the  monastery  is  so  focused  
that  by  the  time  a  monk  sets  off  on  her  own,  she  feels  little  con-
nection to her former family or village. 
In  larger  cities,  master  monks  have  set  up  monk  schools  to  teach  
their  arts  to  those  who  are  interested  and  worthy.  The  monks  who  
study  at  these  academies  often  see  their  rural  cousins  from  the  
monasteries as backward. 
A  monk  may  feel  a  deep  connection  to  her  monastery  or  school,  
to  the  monk  who  taught  her,  to  the  lineage  into  which  she  was  
trained,  or  to  all  of  these.  Some  monks,  however,  have  no  sense  of  
connection other than to their own path of personal development. 
Monks  recognize  each  other  as  a  select  group  set  apart  from  the  
rest  of  the  populace.  They  may  feel  kinship,  but  they  also  love  to  
compete with each other to see whose ki is strongest. 
Races:  Monasteries  are  found  primarily  among  humans,  who  
have   incorporated   them   into   their   ever-evolving   culture.   Thus,   
many monks are humans, and many are half-orcs and half-elves who 
live  among  humans.  Elves  are  capable  of  single-minded,  long-term  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
40 
devotion to an interest, art, or discipline, and some of them leave the 
forests  to  become  monks.  The  monk  tradition  is  alien  to  dwarf  and  
gnome  culture,  and  halflings  typically  have  too  mobile  a  lifestyle  to  
commit   themselves   to   a   monastery,   so   dwarves,   gnomes,   and   
halflings very rarely become monks. 
The savage humanoids do not have the stable social structure that 
allows  monk  training,  but  the  occasional  orphaned  or  abandoned  
child  from  some  humanoid  tribe  winds  up  in  a  civilized  monastery  
or  is  adopted  by  a  wandering  master.  The  evil  subterranean  elves  
known as the drow have a small but successful monk tradition. 
Other  Classes:  Monks  sometimes  seem  distant  because  they  
often  have  neither  motivation  nor  skills  in  common  with  members  
of  other  classes.  Monks  do,  however,  work  well  with  the  support  of  
others, and they usually prove themselves reliable companions. 
Role:  The  monk  functions  best  as  an  opportunistic  combatant,  
using  her  speed  to  get  into  and  out  of  combat  quickly  rather  than  
engaging  in  prolonged  melees.  She  also  makes  an  excellent  scout,  
particularly if she focuses her skill selection on stealth. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Monks have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:   Wisdom   powers   the   monk’s   special   offensive   and   
defensive capabilities. Dexterity provides the unarmored monk with 
a  better  defense  and  with  bonuses  to  some  class  skills.  Strength  
helps a monk’s unarmed combat ability. 
Alignment: Any lawful. 
Hit Die: d8. 
 
Class Skills 
The monk’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Balance 
(Dex),  Climb  (Str),  Concentration  (Con),  Craft  (Int),  Diplomacy  
(Cha),  Escape  Artist  (Dex),  Hide  (Dex),  Jump  (Str),  Knowledge  
(arcana)   (Int),   Knowledge   (religion)   (Int),   Listen   (Wis),   Move   
Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), 
Spot  (Wis),  Swim  (Str),  and  Tumble  (Dex).  See  Chapter  4:  Skills  for  
skill descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the monk. 
Weapon  and  Armor  Proficiency:  Monks  are  proficient  with  
certain  basic  peasant  weapons  and  some  special  weapons  that  are  
part of monk training. The weapons with which a monk is proficient 
are  club,  crossbow  (light  or  heavy),  dagger,  handaxe,  javelin,  kama,  
nunchaku,   quarterstaff,   sai,   shuriken,   siangham,   and   sling.   (See   
Chapter  7:  Equipment  for  descriptions  of  these  weapons.)  Monks  
are  not  proficient  with  any  armor  or  shields—in  fact,  many  of  the  
monk’s    special    powers    require    unfettered    movement.    When    
wearing armor, using a shield, or carrying a medium or heavy load, a 
monk loses her AC bonus, as well as her fast movement and flurry of 
blows abilities. 
AC  Bonus  (Ex): A monk is highly trained at dodging blows, and 
she  has  a  sixth  sense  that  lets  her  avoid  even  unanticipated  attacks.  
When  unarmored  and  unencumbered,  the  monk  adds  her  Wisdom  
bonus (if any) to her AC. In addition, a monk gains a +1 bonus to AC 
at  5th  level.  This  bonus  increases  by  1  for  every  five  monk  levels  
thereafter (+2 at 10th, +3 at 15th, and +4 at 20th level). 
These  bonuses  to  AC  apply  even  against  touch  attacks  or  when  
the   monk   is   flat-footed.   She   loses   these   bonuses   when   she   is   
immobilized  or  helpless,  when  she  wears  any  armor,  when  she  
carries a shield, or when she carries a medium or heavy load. 
Flurry of Blows (Ex): When unarmored, a monk may strike with 
a flurry of blows at the expense of accuracy. When doing so, she may 
make  one  extra  attack  in  a  round  at  her  highest  base  attack  bonus,  
but this attack takes a –2 penalty, as does each other attack made that 
round. The resulting modified base attack bonuses are shown in the 
Flurry  of  Blows  Attack  Bonus  column  on  Table  3–10:  The  Monk.  
This   penalty   applies   for   1   round,   so   it   also   affects   attacks   of   
opportunity  the  monk  might  make  before  her  next  action.  When  a  
monk reaches 5th level, the penalty lessens to –1, and at 9th level it 
disappears.  A  monk  must  use  a  full  attack  action  (see  page  143)  to  
strike with a flurry of blows. 
When   using   flurry   of   blows,   a   monk   may   attack   only   with   
unarmed  strikes  or  with  special  monk  weapons  (kama,  nunchaku,  
quarterstaff,   sai,   shuriken,   and   siangham).   She   may   attack   with   
unarmed   strikes   and   special   monk   weapons   interchangeably   as   
Table 3–10: The Monk 
 Base Fort Ref Will  Flurry of Blows Unarmed AC Unarmored 
Level Attack Bonus Save Save Save Special Attack Bonus Damage
1
          Bonus          Speed          Bonus 
  1st +0 +2 +2 +2 Bonus feat, flurry of blows, –2/–2 1d6 +0 +0 ft. 
      unarmed strike 
 2nd +1 +3 +3 +3 Bonus feat, evasion –1/–1 1d6 +0 +0 ft. 
         3rd           +2         +3         +3         +3           Still         mind         +0/+0         1d6         +0         +10         ft.         
         4th           +3         +4         +4         +4         Ki strike (magic), slow fall 20 ft.  +1/+1 1d8 +0 +10 ft. 
  5th +3 +4 +4 +4 Purity of body +2/+2 1d8 +1 +10 ft. 
  6th +4 +5 +5 +5 Bonus feat, slow fall 30 ft. +3/+3 1d8 +1 +20 ft. 
  7th +5 +5 +5 +5 Wholeness of body +4/+4 1d8 +1 +20 ft. 
  8th +6/+1 +6 +6 +6 Slow fall 40 ft. +5/+5/+0 1d10 +1 +20 ft. 
         9th           +6/+1         +6         +6         +6           Improved         evasion         +6/+6/+1         1d10         +1         +30         ft.         
10th          +7/+2         +7         +7         +7         Ki strike (lawful), slow fall 50 ft.  +7/+7/+2 1d10 +2 +30 ft. 
11th +8/+3 +7 +7 +7 Diamond body, greater flurry +8/+8/+8/+3 1d10 +2 +30 ft. 
12th +9/+4 +8 +8 +8 Abundant step, slow fall 60 ft.     +9/+9/+9/+4 2d6 +2 +40 ft. 
13th          +9/+4         +8         +8         +8           Diamond         soul         +9/+9/+9/+4         2d6         +2         +40         ft.         
14th +10/+5 +9 +9 +9 Slow fall 70 ft. +10/+10/+10/+5 2d6 +2 +40 ft. 
15th          +11/+6/+1           +9         +9         +9           Quivering         palm         +11/+11/+11/+6/+1             2d6         +3         +50         ft.         
16th           +12/+7/+2           +10           +10           +10           Ki strike (adamantine), +12/+12/+12/+7/+2 2d8 +3 +50 ft. 
                                                                              slow             fall             80             ft.             
17th +12/+7/+2 +10 +10 +10 Timeless body, +12/+12/+12/+7/+2 2d8 +3 +50 ft. 
      tongue of the sun and moon 
18th +13/+8/+3 +11 +11 +11 Slow fall 90 ft. +13/+13/+13/+8/+3 2d8 +3 +60 ft. 
19th          +14/+9/+4          +11       +11       +11          Empty       body       +14/+14/+14/+9/+4       2d8       +3       +60       ft.       
20th +15/+10/+5 +12 +12 +12 Perfect self, +15/+15/+15/+10/+5 2d10 +4 +60 ft. 
                                                                              slow             fall             any             distance             
1 The value shown is for Medium monks. See Table 3–11: Small or Large Monk Unarmed Damage for Small or Large monks. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
41
desired. For example, at 6th level, the monk Ember could make one 
attack  with  her  unarmed  strike  at  an  attack  bonus  of  +3  and  one  
attack  with  a  special  monk  weapon  at  an  attack  bonus  of  +3.  When  
using  weapons  as  part  of  a  flurry  of  blows,  a  monk  applies  her  
Strength bonus (not Str bonus ×  1-1/2 or × 1/2) to her damage rolls 
for  all  successful  attacks,  whether  she  wields  a  weapon  in  one  or  
both  hands.  The  monk  can’t  use  any  weapon  other  than  a  special  
monk weapon as part of a flurry of blows. 
In  the  case  of  the  quarterstaff,  each  end  counts  as  a  separate  
weapon  for  the  purpose  of  using  the  flurry  of  blows  ability.  Even  
though  the  quarterstaff  requires  two  hands  to  use,  a  monk  may  still  
intersperse unarmed strikes with quarterstaff strikes, assuming 
that   she   has   enough   attacks   in   her   flurry   of   blows   
routine  to  do  so.  For  example,  an  8th-level  monk  
could    make    two    attacks    
with   the   quarterstaff   (one   
with each end) at a +5 attack 
bonus    and    one    with    an    
unarmed  strike  at  a  +0  attack  
bonus, or she could attack with 
one  end  of  the  quarterstaff  and  
one  unarmed  strike  each  at  a  +5  
attack  bonus,  and  with  the  other  
end   of   the   quarterstaff   at   a   +0   
attack  bonus,  or  she  could  attack  
with  one  end  of  the  quarterstaff  and  
one   unarmed   strike   at   a   +5   attack   
bonus  each,  and  with  the  other  end  of  
the  quarterstaff  at  a  +0  attack  bonus.  
She  cannot,  however,  wield  any  other  
weapon  at  the  same  time  that  she  uses  
a quarterstaff. 
When a monk reaches 11th level, her 
flurry   of   blows   ability   improves.   In   
addition   to   the   standard   single   extra   
attack she gets from flurry of blows, she 
gets  a  second  extra  attack  at  her  full  
base attack bonus. 
Unarmed  Strike:  Monks  are  highly  
trained    in    fighting    unarmed,    giving    
them    considerable    advantages    when    
doing   so.   At   1st   level,   a   monk   gains   
Improved Unarmed Strike as a bonus feat. 
A  monk’s  attacks  may  be  with  either  fist  
interchangeably   or   even   from   elbows,   
knees,  and  feet.  This  means  that  a  monk  
may   even   make   unarmed   strikes   with   her   
hands  full.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  off-hand  
attack  for  a  monk  striking  unarmed.  A  monk  may  
thus  apply  her  full  Strength  bonus  on  damage  rolls  
for all her unarmed strikes. 
Usually a monk’s unarmed strikes deal lethal damage, but she can 
choose  to  deal  nonlethal  damage  instead  with  no  penalty  on  her  
attack  roll.  She  has  the  same  choice  to  deal  lethal  or  nonlethal  
damage while grappling. 
A   monk’s   unarmed   strike   is   treated   both   as   a   manufactured   
weapon  and  a  natural  weapon  for  the  purpose  of  spells  and  effects  
that  enhance  or  improve  either  manufactured  weapons  or  natural  
weapons (such as the magic fang and magic weapon spells). 
A monk also deals more damage with her unarmed strikes than a 
normal  person  would,  as  shown  on  Table  3–10:  The  Monk.  The  
unarmed  damage  on  Table  3–10  is  for  Medium  monks.  A  Small  
monk  deals  less  damage  than  the  amount  given  there  with  her  
unarmed attacks, while a Large monk deals more damage; see Table: 
Small or Large Monk Unarmed Damage. 
Table 3–11: Small or Large Monk Unarmed Damage 
Level Damage (Small Monk)    Damage(Large Monk) 
1st–3rd  1d4 1d8 
4th–7th  1d6 2d6 
8th–11th  1d8 2d8 
12th–15th  1d10 3d6 
16th–19th  2d6 3d8 
20th  2d8 4d8
 
 
Bonus  Feat:  At  1st  level,  a  monk  may  select  either  Improved  
Grapple  or  Stunning  Fist  as  a  bonus  feat.  At  2nd  level,  she  
may select either Combat Reflexes or Deflect Arrows as a 
bonus feat. At 6th level, she may select either Improved 
Disarm or Improved Trip as a bonus feat. (See Chapter 
5: Feats for descriptions.) A monk need not have any 
of  the  prerequisites  normally  required  for  these  
feats to select them. 
Evasion  (Ex):  A  monk  of  2nd  level  or  higher  
can avoid even magical and unusual attacks with 
great  agility.  If  she  makes  a  successful  Reflex  
saving  throw  against  an  attack  that  normally  
deals  half  damage  on  a  successful  save  (such  
as a red dragon’s fiery breath or a fireball), she 
instead takes no damage. Evasion can be used 
only  if  a  monk  is  wearing  light  armor  or  no  
armor.  A  helpless  monk  (such  as  one  who  is  
unconscious  or  paralysed)  does  not  gain  the  
benefit of evasion. 
Fast  Movement  (Ex):  At  3rd  level,  a  
monk  gains  an  enhancement  bonus  to  
her  speed,  as  shown  on  Table  3–10.  
A   monk   in   armor   (even   light   
armor)  or  carrying  a  medium  
or    heavy    load    loses    this    
extra speed. 
Still  Mind  (Ex):  A  monk  of  3rd  level  or  
higher   gains   a   +2   bonus   on   saving   throws   
against  spells  and  effects  from  the  school  of  
enchantment, since her meditation and training 
improve     her     resistance     to     mind-affecting     
attacks. 
Ki   Strike   (Su):   At   4th   level,   a   monk’s   
unarmed  attacks  are  empowered  with  ki.  Her  
unarmed  attacks  are  treated  as  magic  weapons  
for    the    purpose    of    dealing    damage    to    
creatures    with    damage    reduction    (see    
Damage   Reduction,   page   291   of   the   
Dungeon    Master’s    Guide). Ki    strike    
improves  with  the  character’s  monk  
level.  At  10th  level,  her  unarmed  attacks  are  also  treated  as  lawful  
weapons   for   the   purpose   of   dealing   damage   to   creatures   with   
damage  reduction.  At  16th  level,  her  unarmed  attacks  are  treated  as  
adamantine weapons for the purpose of dealing damage to creatures 
with  damage  reduction  and  bypassing  hardness  (see  Smashing  an  
Object, page 165). 
Slow Fall (Ex): At 4th level or higher, a monk within arm’s reach 
of a wall can use it to slow her descent. When first using this ability, 
she takes damage as if the fall were 20 feet shorter than it actually is. 
The  monk’s  ability  to  slow  her  fall  (that  is,  to  reduce  the  effective  
distance  of  the  fall  when  next  to  a  wall)  improves  with  her  monk  
level until at 20th level she can use a nearby wall to slow her descent 
and fall any distance without harm. See the Special column on Table 
3–10 for details. 
Purity  of  Body  (Ex): At 5th level, a monk gains control over her 
body’s  immune  system.  She  gains  immunity  to  all  diseases  except  
for  supernatural  and  magical  diseases  (such  as  mummy  rot  and  
lycanthropy). 
Ember 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
42 
Wholeness of Body (Su): At 7th level or higher, a monk can heal 
her  own  wounds.  She  can  heal  a  number  of  hit  points  of  damage  
equal  to  twice  her  current  monk  level  each  day,  and  she  can  spread  
this healing out among several uses. 
Improved  Evasion  (Ex):  At  9th  level,  a  monk’s  evasion  ability  
improves.  She  still  takes  no  damage  on  a  successful  Reflex  saving  
throw  against  attacks  such  as  a  dragon’s  breath  weapon  or  a  fireball, 
but  henceforth  she  takes  only  half  damage  on  a  failed  save.  A  help-
less  monk  (such  as  one  who  is  unconscious  or  paralysed)  does  not  
gain the benefit of improved evasion. 
Diamond  Body  (Su):  At  11th  level,  a  monk  is  in  such  firm  con-
trol of her own metabolism that she gains immunity to poisons of all 
kinds. 
Abundant  Step  (Su):  At  12th  level  or  higher,  a  monk  can  slip  
magically  between  spaces,  as  if  using  the  spell  dimension  door,  once  
per  day.  Her  caster  level  for  this  effect  is  one-half  her  monk  level  
(rounded down). 
Diamond Soul (Ex): At 13th level, a monk gains spell resistance 
equal  to  her  current  monk  level  +  10.  In  order  to  affect  the  monk  
with  a  spell,  a  spellcaster  must  get  a  result  on  a  caster  level  check  
(1d20  +  caster  level;  see  Spell  Resistance,  page  177)  that  equals  or  
exceeds the monk’s spell resistance. 
Quivering  Palm  (Su):  Starting  at  15th  level,  a  monk  can  set  up  
vibrations within the body of another creature that can thereafter be 
fatal  if  the  monk  so  desires.  She  can  use  this  quivering  palm  attack  
once  a  week,  and  she  must  announce  her  intent  before  making  her  
attack  roll.  Constructs,  oozes,  plants,  undead,  incorporeal  creatures,  
and creatures immune to critical hits cannot be affected. Otherwise, 
if  the  monk  strikes  successfully  and  the  target  takes  damage  from  
the  blow,  the  quivering  palm  attack  succeeds.  Thereafter  the  monk  
can  try  to  slay  the  victim  at  any  later  time,  as  long  as  the  attempt  is  
made  within  a  number  of  days  equal  to  her  monk  level.  To  make  
such  an  attempt,  the  monk  merely  wills  the  target  to  die  (a  free  
action), and unless the target makes a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 
+  1/2  the  monk’s  level  +  the  monk’s  Wis  modifier),  it  dies.  If  the  
saving  throw  is  successful,  the  target  is  no  longer  in  danger  from  
that  particular  quivering  palm  attack,  but  it  may  still  be  affected  by  
another one at a later time. 
Timeless  Body  (Ex):  Upon  attaining  17th  level,  a  monk  no  
longer  takes  penalties  to  her  ability  scores  for  aging  and  cannot  be  
magically   aged.   Any   such   penalties   that   she   has   already   taken,   
however,  remain  in  place.  Bonuses  still  accrue,  and  the  monk  still  
dies of old age when her time is up. 
Tongue  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  (Ex):  A  monk  of  17th  level  or  
higher can speak with any living creature. 
Empty  Body  (Su):  At  19th  level,  a  monk  gains  the  ability  to  
assume  an  ethereal  state  for  1  round  per  monk  level  per  day,  as  
though using the spell etherealness. She may go ethereal on a number 
of  different  occasions  during  any  single  day,  as  long  as  the  total  
number  of  rounds  spent  in  an  ethereal  state  does  not  exceed  her  
monk level. 
Perfect Self: At 20th level, a monk has tuned her body with skill 
and  quasi-magical  abilities  to  the  point  that  she  becomes  a  magical  
creature.  She  is  forevermore  treated  as  an  outsider  (an  extraplanar  
creature)  rather  than  as  a  humanoid  for  the  purpose  of  spells  and  
magical   effects.   For   instance,   charm   person   does   not   affect   her.   
Additionally,  the  monk  gains  damage  reduction  10/magic,  which  
allows  her  to  ignore  the  first  10  points  of  damage  from  any  attack  
made  by  a  nonmagical  weapon  or  by  any  natural  attack  made  by  a  
creature  that  doesn’t  have  similar  damage  reduction  (see  Damage  
Reduction,  page  291  of  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide).  Unlike  other  
outsiders, the monk can still be brought back from the dead as if she 
were a member of her previous creature type. 
 
 
Ex-Monks 
A monk who becomes nonlawful cannot gain new levels as a monk 
but retains all monk abilities. 
Like  a  member  of  any  other  class,  a  monk  may  be  a  multiclass  
character,  but  multiclass  monks  face  a  special  restriction.  A  monk  
who  gains  a  new  class  or  (if  already  multiclass)  raises  another  class  
by  a  level  may  never  again  raise  her  monk  level,  though  she  retains  
all her monk abilities. 
 
Human Monk Starting Package 
Armor: None (speed 30 ft). 
Weapons:   Quarterstaff   (1d6/1d6,   crit   ×2,   4   lb.,   two-handed,   
bludgeoning). 
Sling (1d4, crit ×2, range inc. 50 ft., 0 lb., bludgeoning). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 5 + Int modifier. 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Listen                                           4                                           Wis                                           —                                           
Climb                                           4                                           Str                                           0                                           
Move Silently 4 Dex 0 
Tumble                                        4                                        Dex                                        0                                        
Jump                                            4                                            Str                                            0                                            
Escape Artist 4 Dex 0 
Hide                                             4                                             Dex                                             0                                             
Swim                                            4                                            Str                                            0                                            
Balance                                        4                                        Dex                                        0 
 
Feat:  If  Dexterity  is  13  or  higher,  Dodge;  if  Dexterity  is  12  or  
lower, Improved Initiative instead. 
Bonus  Feat: If Dexterity is 13 or higher, Mobility; if Dexterity is 
12 or lower, Blind-Fight instead. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, and flint and steel. Three torches. Pouch with 10 sling stones. 
Gold: 2d4 gp. 
 
PALADIN 
The  compassion  to  pursue  good,  the  will  to  uphold  law,  and  the  
power  to  defeat  evil—these  are  the  three  weapons  of  the  paladin.  
Few  have  the  purity  and  devotion  that  it  takes  to  walk  the  paladin’s  
path, but those few are rewarded with the power to protect, to heal, 
and   to   smite.   In   a   land   of   scheming   wizards,   unholy   priests,   
bloodthirsty  dragons,  and  infernal  fiends,  the  paladin  is  the  final  
hope that cannot be extinguished. 
Adventures:  Paladins  take  their  adventures  seriously  and  have  a  
penchant  for  referring  to  them  as  quests.  Even  a  mundane  mission  
is,  in  the  heart  of  the  paladin,  a  personal  test—an  opportunity  to  
demonstrate bravery, to develop martial skills, to learn tactics, and to 
find  ways  to  do  good.  Still,  the  paladin  really  comes  into  her  own  
when  leading  a  mighty  campaign  against  evil,  not  when  merely  
looting ruins. 
Characteristics: Divine power protects the paladin and gives her 
special powers. It wards off harm, protects her from disease, lets her 
heal  herself,  and  guards  her  heart  against  fear.  The  paladin  can  also  
direct  this  power  to  help  others,  healing  their  wounds  or  curing  
diseases. Finally, the paladin can use this power to destroy evil. Even 
the  least  experienced  paladin  can  detect  evil,  and  more  experienced  
paladins can smite evil foes and turn away undead. In addition, this 
power  draws  a  mighty  steed  to  the  paladin  and  imbues  that  mount  
with strength, intelligence, and magical protection. 
Alignment:  Paladins  must  be  lawful  good,  and  they  lose  their  
divine  powers  if  they  deviate  from  that  alignment.  Additionally,  
paladins  swear  to  follow  a  code  of  conduct  that  is  in  line  with  law-
fulness and goodness. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
43
Religion:   Paladins   need   not   devote   themselves   to   a   
single  deity—devotion  to  righteousness  is  enough.  Those  
who    align    themselves    with    particular    religions    prefer    
Heironeous  (god  of  valor)  over  all  others,  but  some  paladins  
follow  Pelor  (the  sun  god).  Paladins  devoted  to  a  god  are  
scrupulous in observing religious duties and are welcome in 
every associated temple. 
Background:  No  one  ever  chooses  to  be  a  paladin.  
Becoming  a  paladin  is  answering  a  call,  accepting  one’s  
destiny.  No  one,  no  matter  how  diligent,  can  become  a  
paladin  through  practice.  The  nature  is  either  within  
one  or  not,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  gain  the  paladin’s  
nature  by  any  act  of  will.  It  is  possible,  however,  to  fail  
to   recognize   one’s   own   potential,   or   to   deny   one’s   
destiny. Occasionally, one who is called to be a paladin 
denies that call and pursues some other life instead. 
Most  paladins  answer  the  call  and  begin  training  
as  adolescents.  Typically,  they  become  squires  or  
assistants  to  experienced  paladins,  train  for  
years,   and   finally   set   off   on   their   own   to   
further  the  causes  of  good  and  law.  Other  
paladins,  however,  find  their  calling  only  
later  in  life,  after  having  pursued  some  
other  career.  All  paladins,  regardless  
of   background,   recognize   in   each   
other      an      eternal      bond      that      
transcends  culture,  race,  and  even  
religion.  Any  two  paladins,  even  
from  opposite  sides  of  the  world,  
consider themselves comrades. 
Races:   Humans,   with   their   
ambitious     souls,     make     great     
paladins.  Half-elves,  who  often  
have human ambition, may also 
find    themselves    called    into    
service   as   paladins.   Dwarves   
are   sometimes   paladins,   but   
becoming  a  paladin  may  be  
hard  on  a  dwarf  because  it  
means  putting  the  duties  of  
the     paladin’s     life     before     
duties  to  family,  clan,  and  king.  Elf  paladins  are  few,  and  they  
tend  to  follow  quests  that  take  them  far  and  wide  because  
their lawful bent puts them out of synch with life among the 
elves.  Members  of  the  other  common  races  rarely  hear  the  
call to become paladins. 
Among   the   savage   humanoids,   paladins   are   all   but   
unheard of. 
Other  Classes:  Even  though  paladins  are  in  some  ways  
set  apart  from  others,  they  eagerly  team  up  with  those  
whose  skills  and  capabilities  complement  their  own.  
They  work  well  with  good  and  lawful  clerics,  and  
they  appreciate  working  with  those  who  are  
brave,  honest,  and  committed  to  good.  While  
they     cannot     abide     evil     acts     by     their     
companions,  they  are  otherwise  willing  to  
work  with  a  variety  of  people  quite  different  
from themselves. Charismatic, trustworthy, and 
well  respected,  the  paladin  makes  a  fine  leader  
for a team. 
Role:   The   paladin’s   chief   role   in   most   
groups   is   as   a   melee   combatant,   but   she   
contributes  other  useful  support  as  well.  She  
makes  a  good  secondary  healer,  and  her  high  
Charisma   opens   up   fine   leadership   opportu-
nities. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Paladins have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:   Charisma   enhances   a   paladin’s   
healing,    self-protective    capabilities,    and    
undead    turning    ability.    Strength    is    
important  for  a  paladin  because  of  its  
role  in  combat.  A  Wisdom  score  of  
14  or  higher  is  required  to  get  
access    to    the    most    powerful    
paladin spells, and a score of 11 or 
higher is required to cast any 
paladin spells at all. 
Alignment: Lawful good. 
Hit Die: d10. 
 
 
Table 3–12: The Paladin
 
 Base Fort Ref Will ———— Spells per Day ———— 
Level          Attack          Bonus          Save           Save           Save          Special          1st             2nd             3rd             4th          
              1st              +1              +2              +0              +0                Aura              of              good,              detect evil, smite evil 1/day — — — — 
 2nd +2 +3 +0 +0 Divine grace, lay on hands — — — — 
  3rd +3 +3 +1 +1 Aura of courage, divine health — — — — 
              4th              +4              +4              +1              +1                Turn              undead              0               —              —              —              
  5th           +5                                  +4              +1              +1                Smite evil 2/day, special mount, Bonus Feat    0               —              —              — 
              6th              +6/+1              +5              +2              +2              Remove disease 1/week 1 — — — 
              7th              +7/+2              +5              +2              +2                              1               —              —              —              
              8th              +8/+3              +6              +2              +2                              1                0               —              —              
              9th              +9/+4              +6              +3              +3              Remove disease 2/week 1 0 — — 
10th              +10/+5              +7              +3              +3                Smite              evil              3/day
, Bonus Feat                              1                1               —              —              
11th              +11/+6/+1              +7              +3              +3                              1                1                0               —              
12th              +12/+7/+2              +8              +4              +4              Remove disease 3/week 1 1 1 — 
13th              +13/+8/+3              +8              +4              +4                              1                1                1               —              
14th              +14/+9/+4              +9              +4              +4                              2                1                1                0              
15th              +15/+10/+5              +9              +5              +5              Remove disease 4/week, smite evil 4/day 2 1 1 1 
16th                +16/+11/+6/+1                +10             +5              +5                
Bonus Feat                                                           2                2                1                1                
17th                +17/+12/+7/+2                +10                +5                +5                                2                2                2                1                
18th           +18/+13/+8/+3            +11             +6              +6           Remove disease                5/week                3                2                2                1                
19th           +19/+14/+9/+4            +11             +6              +6                      3           3           3           2           
20th +20/+15/+10/+5 +12 +6 +6 Smite evil 5/day 3 3 3 3 
Alhandra 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
44 
Class Skills 
The  paladin’s  class  skills  (and  the  key  ability  for  each  skill)  are  
Concentration  (Con),  Craft  (Int),  Diplomacy  (Cha),  Handle  Animal  
(Cha),    Heal    (Wis),    Knowledge    (nobility    and    royalty)    (Int),    
Knowledge  (religion)  (Int),  Profession  (Wis),  Ride  (Dex),  and  Sense  
Motive (Wis). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the paladin. 
Weapon  and  Armor  Proficiency:  Paladins  are  proficient  with  
all  simple  and  martial  weapons,  with  all  types  of  armor  (heavy,  
medium, and light), and with shields (except tower shields). 
Aura of Good (Ex): The power of a paladin’s aura of good (see the 
detect  good  spell)  is  equal  to  her  paladin  level,  just  like  the  aura  of  a  
cleric of a good deity. 
Detect Evil (Sp): At will, a paladin can use detect evil, as the spell. 
Smite  Evil  (Su):  Once  per  day,  a  paladin  may  attempt  to  smite  
evil with one normal melee attack. She adds her Charisma bonus (if 
any) to her attack roll and deals 1 extra point of damage per paladin 
level.  For  example,  a  13th-level  paladin  armed  with  a  longsword  
would deal 1d8+13 points of damage, plus any additional bonuses for 
high  Strength  or  magical  affects  that  would  normally  apply.  If  the  
paladin  accidentally  smites  a  creature  that  is  not  evil,  the  smite  has  
no effect, but the ability is still used up for that day. 
At  5th  level,  and  at  every  five  levels  thereafter,  the  paladin  may  
smite  evil  one  additional  time  per  day,  as  indicated  on  Table  3–12:  
The Paladin, to a maximum of five times per day at 20th level. 
Divine Grace (Su): At 2nd level, a paladin gains a bonus equal to 
her Charisma bonus (if any) on all saving throws. 
Lay  on  Hands  (Su):  Beginning  at  2nd  level,  a  paladin  with  a  
Charisma  score  of  12  or  higher  can  heal  wounds  (her  own  or  those  
of  others)  by  touch.  Each  day  she  can  heal  a  total  number  of  hit  
points  of  damage  equal  to  her  paladin  level  ×  her  Charisma  bonus.  
For  example,  a  7th-level  paladin  with  a  16  Charisma  (+3  bonus)  can  
heal  21  points  of  damage  per  day.  A  paladin  may  choose  to  divide  
her healing among multiple recipients, and she doesn’t have to use it 
all at once. Using lay on hands is a standard action. 
Alternatively, a paladin can use any or all of this healing power to 
deal  damage  to  undead  creatures.  Using  lay  on  hands  in  this  way  
requires  a  successful  melee  touch  attack  and  doesn’t  provoke  an  
attack  of  opportunity.  The  paladin  decides  how  many  of  her  daily  
allotment  of  points  to  use  as  damage  after  successfully  touching  an  
undead creature. 
Aura   of   Courage   (Su):   Beginning   at   3rd   level,   a   paladin   is   
immune  to  fear  (magical  or  otherwise).  Each  ally  within  10  feet  of  
her gains a +4 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects. 
This  ability  functions  while  the  paladin  is  conscious,  but  not  if  
she is unconscious or dead. 
Divine Health (Ex): At 3rd level, a paladin gains immunity to all 
diseases,   including   supernatural   and   magical   diseases   (such   as   
mummy rot and lycanthropy). 
Turn  Undead  (Su):  When  a  paladin  reaches  4th  level,  she  gains  
the  supernatural  ability  to  turn  undead.  She  may  use  this  ability  a  
number  of  times  per  day  equal  to  3  +  her  Charisma  modifier.  She  
turns  undead  as  a  cleric  of  three  levels  lower  would.  (See  Turn  or  
Rebuke Undead, page 159.) 
Spells: Beginning at 4th level, a paladin gains the ability to cast a 
small  number  of  divine  spells  (the  same  type  of  spells  available  to  
the  cleric,  druid,  and  ranger),  which  are  drawn  from  the  paladin  
spell list (page 191). A paladin must choose and prepare her spells in 
advance. 
To  prepare  or  cast  a  spell,  a  paladin  must  have  a  Wisdom  score  
equal  to  at  least  10  +  the  spell  level  (Wis  11  for  1st-level  spells,  Wis  
12 for 2nd-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving 
throw  against  a  paladin’s  spell  is  10  +  the  spell  level  +  the  paladin’s  
Wisdom modifier. 
Like other spellcasters, a paladin can cast only a certain number of 
spells  of  each  spell  level  per  day.  Her  base  daily  spell  allotment  is  
given  on  Table  3–12:  The  Paladin.  In  addition,  she  receives  bonus  
spells per day if she has a high Wisdom score (see Table 1–1: Ability 
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). When Table 3–12 indicates that 
the  paladin  gets  0  spells  per  day  of  a  given  spell  level  (for  instance,  
1st-level  spells  for  a  4th-level  paladin),  she  gains  only  the  bonus  
spells  she  would  be  entitled  to  based  on  her  Wisdom  score  for  that  
spell level The paladin does not have access to any domain spells or 
granted powers, as a cleric does. 
A  paladin  prepares  and  casts  spells  the  way  a  cleric  does,  though  
she cannot lose a prepared spell to spontaneously cast a cure spell in 
its  place.  A  paladin  may  prepare  and  cast  any  spell  on  the  paladin  
spell  list  (page  191),  provided  that  she  can  cast  spells  of  that  level,  
but   she   must   choose   which   spells   to   prepare   during   her   daily   
meditation. 
Through  3rd  level,  a  paladin  has  no  caster  level.  At  4th  level  and  
higher, her caster level is one-half her paladin level. 
Special  Mount  (Sp):  Upon  reaching  5th  level,  a  paladin  gains  the  
service  of  an  unusually  intelligent,  strong,  and  loyal  steed  to  serve  
her  in  her  crusade  against  evil  (see  the  sidebar).  This  mount  is  usu-
ally  a  heavy  warhorse  (for  a  Medium  paladin)  or  a  warpony  (for  a  
Small paladin). 
Once  per  day,  as  a  full-round  action,  a  paladin  may  magically  call  
her  mount  from  the  celestial  realms  in  which  it  resides.  The  mount  
immediately appears adjacent to the paladin and remains for 2 hours 
per  paladin  level;  it  may  be  dismissed  at  any  time  as  a  free  action.  
The  mount  is  the  same  creature  each  time  it  is  summoned,  though  
the  paladin  may  release  a  particular  mount  from  service  (if  it  has  
grown  too  old  to  join  her  crusade,  for  instance).  Each  time  the  
mount is called, it appears in full health, regardless of any damage it 
may  have  taken  previously.  The  mount  also  appears  wearing  or  
carrying  any  gear  it  had  when  it  was  last  dismissed  )including  
barding,  saddle,  saddlebags,  and  the  like).  Calling  a  mount  is  a  
conjuration (calling) effect. 
Should  the  paladin’s  mount  die,  it  immediately  disappears,  leav-
ing  behind  any  equipment  it  was  carrying.  The  paladin  may  not  
summon  another  mount  for  thirty  days  or  until  she  gains  a  paladin  
level, whichever comes first, even if the mount is somehow returned 
from  the  dead.  During  this  thirty-day  period,  the  paladin  takes  a  –1  
penalty on attack and weapon damage rolls. 
Remove  Disease  (Sp):  At  6th  level,  a  paladin  can  produce  a  remove 
disease effect, as the spell, once per week. She can use this ability one 
additional  time  per  week  for  every  three  levels  after  6th  (twice  per  
week at 9th, three times at 12th, and so forth). 
Code  of  Conduct:  A  paladin  must  be  of  lawful  good  alignment  
and  loses  all  class  abilities  if  she  ever  willingly  commits  an  evil  act.  
Additionally,  a  paladin’s  code  requires  that  she  respect  legitimate  
authority, act with honor (not lying, not cheating, not using poison, 
and so forth), help those in need (provided they do not use the help 
for  evil  or  chaotic  ends),  and  punish  those  who  harm  or  threaten  
innocents. 
Associates:  While  she  may  adventure  with  characters  of  any  
good or neutral alignment, a paladin will never knowingly associate 
with  evil  characters,  nor  will  she  continue  an  association  with  
someone  who  consistently  offends  her  moral  code.  A  paladin  may  
accept only henchmen, followers, or cohorts who are lawful good. 
 
Ex-Paladins 
A  paladin  who  ceases  to  be  lawful  good,  who  willfully  commits  an  
evil act, or who grossly violates the code of conduct loses all paladin 
spells and abilities (including the service of the paladin’s mount, but 
not  weapon,  armor,  and  shield  proficiencies).  She  may  not  progress  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
45
any  farther  in  levels  as  a  paladin.  She  regains  her  abilities  and  
advancement  potential  if  she  atones  for  her  violations  (see  the  
atonement spell description, page 201), as appropriate. 
Like  a  member  of  any  other  class,  a  paladin  may  be  a  multiclass  
character, but multiclass paladins face a special restriction. A paladin 
who  gains  a  level  in  any  class  other  than  paladin  may  never  again  
raise  her  paladin  level,  though  she  retains  all  her  paladin  abilities.  
The  path  of  the  paladin  requires  a  constant  heart.  If  a  character  
adopts  this  class,  she  must  pursue  it  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  
careers. Once she has turned off the path, she may never return. 
Human Paladin Starting Package 
Armor:  Scale  mail  (+4  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –4,  speed  20  ft.,  
30 lb.). 
Heavy wooden shield (+2 AC, armor check penalty –2, 10 lb.). 
Weapons:  Longsword  (1d8,  crit  19–20/×2,  4  lb.,  one-handed,  
slashing). 
Shortbow (1d6, crit ×3, range inc. 60 ft., 2 lb., piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 3 + Int modifier. 
 
 
THE PALADIN’S MOUNT 
The paladin’s mount is superior to a normal mount of its kind and has
special  powers,  as  described  below.  The  standard  mount  for  a  Medium
paladin is a heavy warhorse, and the standard mount for a Small paladin 
is  a  warpony  (see  below  for  statistics).  Your  DM  may  work  with  you  to
select another kind of mount, such as a riding dog (for a halfling paladin)
or  a  Large  shark  (for  a  paladin  in  an  aquatic  campaign).  A  paladin’s
mount is treated as a magical beast, not an animal, for the purpose of all
effects  that  depend  on  its  type  (though  it  retains  an  animal’s  HD,  base
attack bonus, saves, skill points, and feats). 
 
Paladin     Bonus       Natural     Str     
Level           HD           Armor           Adj.           Adj.           Int           Special 
5th–7th  +2  +4  +1  6  Empathic link, improved 
                                                                      evasion,              share              spells,              
                                                                 share             saving             throws             
8th–10th      +4  +6  +2  7  Improved speed 
11th–14th    +6  +8  +3  8  Command creatures of 
     its kind 
15th–20th    +8  +10  +4  9  Spell resistance 
 
Paladin’s  Mount  Basics:  Use  the  base  statistics  for  a  creature  of  the  
mount’s kind, as given in the Monster Manual, but make changes to take
into account the attributes and characteristics summarized on the table
and described below. 
Bonus  HD:  Extra  eight-sided  (d8)  Hit  Dice,  each  of  which  gains  a  
Constitution  modifier,  as  normal.  Extra  Hit  Dice  improve  the  mount’s
base attack and base save bonuses. A special mount’s base attack bonus
is equal to that of a cleric of a level equal to the mount’s HD. A mount
has  good  Fortitude  and  Reflex  saves  (treat  it  as  a  character  whose  level
equals the animal’s HD). The mount gains additional skill points or feats
for  bonus  HD  as  normal  for  advancing  a  monster’s  Hit  Dice  (see  the
Monster Manual). 
Natural Armor Adj.: The number on the table is an improvement to the 
mount’s  existing  natural  armor  bonus.  It  represents  the  preternatural
toughness of a paladin’s mount. 
Str Adj.: Add this figure to the mount’s Strength score. 
Int: The mount’s Intelligence score. 
Empathic Link (Su): The paladin has an empathic link with her mount
out  to  a  distance  of  up  to  1  mile.  The  paladin  cannot  see  through  the
mount’s  eyes,  but  they  can  communicate  empathically.  Note  that  even
intelligent    mounts    see    the    world    differently    from    humans,    so
misunderstandings are always possible. 
Because of this empathic link, the paladin has the same connection to
an  item  or  place  that  her  mount  does,  
just  as  with  a  master  and  his
familiar (see Familiars, page 52). 
Improved  Evasion  (Ex):  When  sub
jected  to  an  attack  that  normally
allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, a mount takes no damage
if it makes a successful saving throw and half damage if the saving throw
fails. 
Share Spells: At the paladin’s option, she may have any spell (but not
any  spell-like  ability)  she  casts  on  herself  also  affect  her  mount.  The
mount must be within 5 feet at the time of casting to receive the benefit. 
If  the  spell  or  effect  has  a  duration  other  than  instantaneous,  it  stops  
affecting the mount if it moves farther than 5 feet away and will not affect 
the  mount  again  even  if  it  returns  to  the  paladin  before  the  duration  
expires. Additionally, the paladin may cast a spell with a target of “You” 
on  her  mount  (as  a  touch  range  spell)  instead  of  on  herself.  A  paladin  
and her mount can share spells even if the spells normally do not affect 
creatures of the mount’s type (magical beast). 
Share Saving Throws:For each of its saving throws, the mount uses its 
own  base  save  bonus  or  the  paladin’s,  whichever  is  higher.  The  mount  
applies its own ability modifiers to saves, and it doesn’t share any other 
bonuses on saves that the master might have (such as from magic items 
or feats). 
Improved Speed (Ex): The mount’s speed increases by 10 feet. 
Command  (Sp):Once  per  day  per  two  paladin  levels  of  its  master,  a  
mount  can  use  this  ability  to  command  other  any  normal  animal  o
f 
approximately the same kind as itself (for warhorses and warponies, this 
category  includes  donkeys,  mules,  and  ponies),  as  long  as  the  target  
creature has fewer Hit Dice than the mount. This ability functions like the 
commandspell, but the mount must make a DC 21 Concentration check 
to succeed if it’s being ridden at the time (in combat, for instance). If the 
check fails, the ability does not work that time, but it still counts against 
the mount’s daily uses. Each target may attempt a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 
paladin’s level + paladin’s Cha modifier) to negate the effect. 
Spell  Resistance  (Ex):A  mount’s  spell  resistance  equals  its  master’s  
paladin level + 5. To affect the mount with a spell, a spellcaster must get 
a result on a caster level check (1d20 + caster level; see Spell Resistance, 
page 177) that equals or exceeds the mount’s spell resistance. 
 
SAMPLE PALADIN’S MOUNTS 
The  statistics  below  are  for  normal  creatures  of  the  appropriate  kinds;  
they do not include the modifications given on the table above. 
 
 
Heavy Warhorse:CR 2; Large animal; HD 4d8+12; hp 30; Init +1; Spd 
50 ft.; AC 14, touch 10, flat-footed 13; Base Atk +3; Grp +11; Atk +6 melee 
(1d6+4,  hoof);  Full  Atk  +6/+6  melee  (1d6+4,  2  hooves)  and  +1  melee  
(1d4+2, bite); Space/Reach 10 ft./5 ft.; SQ low-light vision, scent; SV Fort 
+7, Ref +5, Will +2; Str 18, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 6. 
Skills and Feats: Jump +12, Listen +5, Spot +4; Endurance, Run. 
 
 
Warpony: CR 1/3; Medium animal; HD 2d8+4; hp 13; Init +1; Spd 40 
ft.;  AC  13,  touch  11,  flat-footed  12;  Base  Atk  +1;  Grp  +3;  Atk  +3  melee  
(1d3+2,  hoof);  Full  Atk  +3/+3  melee  (1d3+2,  2  hooves);  Space/Reach  5  
ft./5 ft.; SQ low-light vision, scent; SV Fort +5, Ref +4, Will +0; Str 15, Dex 
13, Con 14, Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 4. 
Skills and Feats: Jump +6, Listen +5, Spot +5; Endurance. 
 
See  page  85  of  the  Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  for  more  information  on  
how to read a creature’s statistics block. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
46 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Heal                                             4                                             Wis                                             —                                             
Ride                                              4                                              Dex                                              —                                              
Diplomacy                                   4                                   Cha                                   —                                   
Spot (cc) 2 Wis — 
Listen (cc) 2 Wis — 
Climb (cc) 2 Str –6 
Search (cc) 2 Int — 
 
Feat: Weapon Focus (longsword). 
Bonus Feat: Improved Initiative. 
Gear: Backpack with waterskin, one day’s trail rations, bedroll, 
sack, flint and steel. Hooded lantern, three pints of oil. Quiver 
with  20  arrows.  Wooden  holy  symbol  (fist  of  Heironeous,  
god of valor). 
Gold: 6d4 gp. 
 
RANGER 
The  forests  are  home  to  fierce  and  cunning  
creatures,     such     as     bloodthirsty     
owlbears    and    malicious    displacer    
beasts.     But     more     cunning     and     
powerful  than  these  monsters  is  the  
ranger, a skilled hunter and stalker. He 
knows  the  woods  as  if  they  were  his  
home   (as   indeed   they   are),   and   he   
knows his prey in deadly detail. 
Adventures:  A  ranger  often  accepts  
the  role  of  protector,  aiding  those  who  
live in or travel through the woods. In 
addition,    a    ranger    carries    grudges    
against   certain   types   of   creatures   and   
looks    for    opportunities    to    find    and    
destroy  them.  He  may  adventure  for  all  
the reasons that a fighter does. 
Characteristics:  A  ranger  can  use  a  variety  
of  weapons  and  is  quite  capable  in  combat.  
His   skills   allow   him   to   survive   in   the   
wilderness, to find his prey, and to avoid 
detection.     He     also     has     special     
knowledge   about   certain   types   of   
creatures, which makes it easier for him to find and defeat such foes. 
Finally,  an  experienced  ranger  has  such  a  tie  to  nature  that  he  can  
actually  draw  upon  natural  power  to  cast  divine  spells,  much  as  a  
druid does. 
Alignment: Rangers can be of any alignment. Most are good, and 
such rangers usually function as protectors of the wild areas. In this 
role,  a  ranger  seeks  out  and  destroys  or  
drives  off  evil  creatures  that  threaten  
the wilderness. Good rangers also protect 
those  who  travel  through  the  wilderness,  
serving sometimes as guides and sometimes 
as  unseen  guardians.  Most  rangers  are  also  
chaotic,  preferring  to  follow  the  ebb  and  flow  
of  nature  or  of  their  own  hearts  instead  of  rigid  
rules.  Evil  rangers,  though  rare,  are  much  to  be  
feared.    They    revel    in    nature’s    thoughtless    
cruelty and seek to emulate her most fearsome 
predators. They gain divine spells just as good 
rangers do, for nature herself is indifferent to 
good and evil. 
Religion:   Though   a   ranger   gains   his   
divine  spells  from  the  power  of  nature,  he  
like  anyone  else  may  worship  a  chosen  
deity.   Ehlonna   (goddess   of   the   wood-
lands)  and  Obad-Hai  (god  of  nature)  are  
the   most   common   deities   revered   by,   
though some prefer more martial deities. 
Background:   Some   rangers   gained   
their  training  as  part  of  special  military  
teams, but most learned their skills from 
solitary   masters   who   accepted   them   as   
students  and  assistants.  The  rangers  of  a  
particular  master  may  count  themselves  as  
cohorts, or they may be rivals for the status 
of  best  student  and  thus  the  rightful  heir  
to their master’s fame. 
Races:  Elves  often  choose  the  ranger’s  
path.  They  are  at  home  in  the  woods,  and  
they  have  the  grace  to  move  stealthily.  
Half-elves   who   feel   their   elf   parents’   
connection   to   the   woods   are   also   
likely to adopt this class. Humans are 
 
Table 3–13: The Ranger
 
 Base Fort Ref Will ———— Spells per Day ———— 
Level          Attack          Bonus          Save           Save           Save          Special          1st             2nd             3rd             4th          
  1st +1 +2 +2 +0 1st favored enemy, Track, wild empathy — — — — 
              2nd              +2              +3              +3              +0                Combat              style              —              —              —              —              
              3rd              +3              +3              +3              +1                Endurance              —              —              —              —              
              4th              +4              +4              +4              +1                Animal              companion              0               —              —              —              
              5th              +5              +4              +4              +1                2nd              favored              enemy, Bonus Feat                         0               —              —              —              
              6th              +6/+1              +5              +5              +2                Improved              combat              style              1               —              —              —              
              7th              +7/+2              +5              +5              +2                Woodland              stride              1               —              —              —              
              8th              +8/+3              +6              +6              +2                Swift              tracker              1                0               —              —              
              9th              +9/+4              +6              +6              +3                Evasion              1                0               —              —              
10th              +10/+5              +7              +7              +3                3rd              favored              enemy
, Bonus Feat                         1                1               —              —              
11th              +11/+6/+1              +7              +7              +3                Combat              style              mastery              1                1                0               —              
12th              +12/+7/+2              +8              +8              +4                              1                1                1               —              
13th              +13/+8/+3              +8              +8              +4                Camouflage              1                1                1               —              
14th              +14/+9/+4              +9              +9              +4                              2                1                1                0              
15th              +15/+10/+5              +9              +9              +5                4th              favored              enemy, Bonus Feat                       2                1                1                1              
16th            +16/+11/+6/+1            +10            +10             +5                            2            2            1            1            
17th            +17/+12/+7/+2            +10            +10             +5                Hide            in            plain            sight            2            2            2            1            
18th            +18/+13/+8/+3            +11            +11             +6                            3            2            2            1            
19th            +19/+14/+9/+4            +11            +11             +6                            3            3            3            2            
20th           +20/+15/+10/+5          +12            +12             +6                5th favored enemy
, Bonus Feat                          3                3                3                3 
Soveliss 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
47
often  rangers  as  well,  being  adaptable  enough  to  learn  their  way  
around  the  woods  even  if  it  doesn’t  come  naturally  to  them.  Half-
orcs may find the life of a ranger more comfortable than life among 
cruel  and  taunting  humans  (or  orcs).  Gnome  rangers  are  more  
common  than  gnome  fighters,  but  still  they  tend  to  remain  in  their  
own  lands  rather  than  adventure  among  “the  big  people.”  Dwarf  
rangers  are  rare,  but  they  can  be  quite  effective.  Instead  of  living  in  
the  surface  wilderness,  they  are  at  home  in  the  endless  caverns  
beneath the earth. Here they hunt down and destroy the enemies of 
dwarvenkind  with  the  relentless  precision  for  which  dwarves  are  
known.  Dwarf  rangers  are  often  known  as  cavers.  Halfling  rangers  
are   highly   respected   for   their   ability   to   help   communities   of   
halflings prosper as they pursue their nomadic lifestyle. 
Among the savage humanoids, only gnolls are commonly rangers, 
using their skills to slyly stalk their prey. 
Classes:  Rangers  get  along  well  with  druids  and  to  some  extent  
with  barbarians.  They  are  known  to  bicker  with  paladins,  mostly  
because  they  often  share  goals  but  differ  in  style,  tactics,  approach,  
philosophy,  and  esthetics.  Since  rangers  don’t  often  look  to  other  
people  for  support  or  friendship,  they  find  it  easy  to  tolerate  people  
who  are  quite  different  from  themselves,  such  as  bookish  wizards  
and  preachy  clerics.  They  just  don’t  care  enough  to  get  upset  about  
others’ differences. 
Role:  The  ranger’s  best  role  is  that  of  a  scout  and  secondary  
combatant.  Without  the  heavy  armor  of  the  fighter  or  the  staying  
power  of  the  barbarian,  the  ranger  should  focus  on  opportunistic  
and  ranged  attacks.  Most  rangers  user  their  animal  companions  as  
sentries, scouts, or to assist them in melee combat. 
 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Rangers have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:  Dexterity  is  important  for  a  ranger  both  because  he  
tends to wear light armor and because several ranger skills are based 
on that ability. Strength is important because rangers frequently get 
involved  in  combat.  Several  ranger  skills  are  based  on  Wisdom,  and  
a Wisdom score of 14 or higher is required to get access to the most 
powerful  ranger  spells.  A  Wisdom  score  of  11  or  higher  is  required  
to  cast  any  ranger  spells  at  all.  One  of  the  ranger’s  trademark  skills,  
his ability to track foes, is based on Wisdom. 
Alignment: Any. 
Hit Die: d8. 
 
Class Skills 
The ranger’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Climb 
(Str),  Concentration  (Con),  Craft  (Int),  Handle  Animal  (Cha),  Heal  
(Wis),  Hide  (Dex),  Jump  (Str),  Knowledge  (dungeoneering)  (Int),  
Knowledge   (geography)   (Int),   Knowledge   (nature)   (Int),   Listen   
(Wis),  Move  Silently  (Dex),  Profession  (Wis),  Ride  (Dex),  Search  
(Int),  Spot  (Wis),  Survival  (Wis),  Swim  (Str),  and  Use  Rope  (Dex).  
See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (6 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 6 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the ranger. 
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A ranger is proficient with all 
simple   and   martial   weapons,   and   with   light   armor   and   shields   
(except tower shields). 
Favored  Enemy  (Ex):  At  1st  level,  a  ranger  may  select  a  type  of  
creature  from  among  those  given  on  Table  3–14:  Ranger  Favored  
Enemies.  Due  to  his  extensive  study  on  his  chosen  type  of  foe  and  
training in the proper techniques for combating such creatures, the 
ranger  gains  a  +2  bonus  on  Bluff,  Listen,  Sense  Motive,  Spot,  and  
Survival  checks  when  using  these  skills  against  creatures  of  this  
type.  Likewise,  he  gets  a  +2  bonus  on  weapon  damage  rolls  against  
such creatures. 
At  5th  level  and  every  five  levels  thereafter  (10th,  15th,  and  20th  
level), the ranger may select an additional favored enemy from those 
given  on  the  table.  In  addition,  at  each  such  interval,  the  bonus  
against any one favored enemy (including the one just selected, if so 
desired)  increases  by  2.  For  example,  a  5th-level  ranger  has  two  
favored  enemies;  against  one  he  gains  a  +4  bonus  on  Bluff,  Listen,  
Sense  Motive,  Spot,  and  Survival  checks  and  weapon  damage  rolls,  
and  against  the  other  he  has  a  +2  bonus.  At  10th  level,  he  has  three  
favored enemies, and he gains an additional +2 bonus, which he can 
allocate  to  the  bonus  against  any  one  of  his  three  favored  enemies.  
Thus, his bonuses could be either +4, +4, +2 or +6, +2, +2. 
If the ranger chooses humanoids or outsiders as a favored enemy, 
he must also choose an associated subtype, as indicated on the table. 
If  a  specific  creature  falls  into  more  than  one  category  of  favored  
enemy   (for   instance,   devils   are   both   evil   outsiders   and   lawful   
outsiders),   the   ranger’s   bonuses   do   not   stack;   he   simply   uses   
whichever  bonus  is  higher.  See  the  Monster  Manual  for  more  infor-
mation on types of creatures. 
 
Table 3–14: Ranger Favored Enemies 
Type (Subtype) Examples 
Aberration                                beholder                                
Animal                                      bear                                      
Construct                                 golem                                 
Dragon  black dragon 
Elemental                                 invisible                                 stalker                                 
Fey                                            dryad                                            
Giant                                        ogre                                        
Humanoid (aquatic) merfolk 
Humanoid (dwarf) dwarf 
Humanoid (elf) elf 
Humanoid (goblinoid) hobgoblin 
Humanoid (gnoll) gnoll 
Humanoid (gnome) gnome 
Humanoid (halfling) halfling 
Humanoid (human) human 
Humanoid (orc) orc 
Humanoid (reptilian) kobold 
Magical beast displacer beast 
Monstrous humanoid minotaur 
Ooze                                         gelatinous                                         cube                                         
Outsider (air) arrowhawk 
Outsider (chaotic) demon 
Outsider (earth) xorn 
Outsider (evil) devil 
Outsider (fire) salamander 
Outsider (good) angel 
Outsider (lawful) formian 
Outsider (native) tiefling 
Outsider (water) tojanida 
Plant                                         shambling                                         mound                                         
Undead                                    zombie                                    
Vermin                                     monstrous                                     spider                                     
 
Track: A ranger gains Track (see page 101) as a bonus feat. 
Wild  Empathy  (Ex):  A  ranger  can  use  body  language,  vocaliza-
tions, and demeanor to improve the attitude of an animal (such as a 
bear or a monitor lizard). This ability functions just like a Diplomacy 
check  to  improve  the  attitude  of  a  person  (see  page  72).  The  ranger  
rolls  1d20  and  adds  his  ranger  level  and  his  Charisma  bonus  to  
determine  the  wild  empathy  check  result.  The  typical  domestic  
animal  has  a  starting  attitude  of  indifferent,  while  wild  animals  are  
usually unfriendly. 
To  use  wild  empathy,  the  ranger  and  the  animal  must  be  able  to  
study  each  other,  which  means  that  they  must  be  within  30  feet  of  
one    another    under    normal    visibility    conditions.    Generally,    
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
48 
influencing  an  animal  in  this  way  takes  1  minute,  but,  as  with  
influencing people, it might take more or less time. 
The  ranger  can  also  use  this  ability  to  influence  a  magical  beast  
with an Intelligence score of 1 or 2 (such as a basilisk or a girallon), 
but he takes a –4 penalty on the check. 
Combat Style (Ex): At 2nd level, a ranger must select one of two 
combat styles to pursue: archery or two-weapon combat. This choice 
affects   the   character’s   class   features   but   does   not   restrict   his   
selection of feats or special abilities in any way. 
If  the  ranger  selects  archery,  he  is  treated  as  having  the  Rapid  
Shot feat, even if he does not have the normal prerequisites for that 
feat. 
If  the  ranger  selects  two-weapon  combat,  he  is  treated  as  having  
the Two-Weapon Fighting feat, even if he does not have the normal 
prerequisites for that feat. 
The  benefits  of  the  ranger’s  chosen  style  apply  only  when  he  
wears  light  or  no  armor.  He  loses  all  benefits  of  his  combat  style  
when wearing medium or heavy armor. 
Endurance:  A  ranger  gains  Endurance  (see  page  93)  as  a  bonus  
feat at 3rd level. 
Animal  Companion  (Ex): At 4th level, a ranger gains an animal 
companion  selected  from  the  following  list:  badger,  camel,  dire  rat,  
dog, riding dog, eagle, hawk, horse (light or heavy), owl, pony, snake 
(Small or Medium viper), or wolf. If the DM’s campaign takes place 
wholly  or  partly  in  an  aquatic  environment,  the  DM  may  add  the  
following   creatures   to   the   ranger’s   list   of   options:   crocodile,   
porpoise,   Medium   shark,   and   squid.   This   animal   is   a   loyal   
companion   that   accompanies   the   ranger   on   his   adventures   as   
appropriate  for  its  kind.  (For  instance,  an  aquatic  creature  can’t  
adventure  with  a  ranger  on  land  and  shouldn’t  be  selected  by  a  
nonaquatic  character  without  extenuating  circumstances).  In  most  
cases,  the  animal  companion  functions  as  a  mount,  sentry,  scout,  or  
hunting animal, rather than as a protector. 
This ability functions like the druid ability of the same name (see 
page 35), except that the ranger’s effective druid level is one-half his 
ranger  level.  For  example,  the  animal  companion  of  a  4th-level  
ranger   would   be   the   equivalent   of   a   2nd-level   druid’s   animal   
companion.  A  ranger  may  select  from  the  alternative  lists  of  animal  
companions  just  as  a  druid  can,  though  again  his  effective  druid  
level  is  half  his  ranger  level.  Thus,  he  must  be  at  least  an  8th-level  
ranger to select from the druid’s list of 4th-level animal companions, 
and  if  he  chooses  one  of  those  animals,  his  effective  druid  level  
would  be  reduced  by  3,  to  1st  level.  Like  a  druid,  a  ranger  cannot  
select  an  alternative  animal  if  the  choice  would  reduce  his  effective  
druid level below 1st. 
Spells:  Beginning  at  4th  level,  a  ranger  gains  the  ability  to  cast  a  
small  number  of  divine  spells  (the  same  type  of  spells  available  to  
the  cleric,  druid,  and  paladin),  which  are  drawn  from  the  ranger  
spell  list  (page  191).  A  ranger  must  choose  and  prepare  his  spells  in  
advance (see below). 
To  prepare  or  cast  a  spell,  a  ranger  must  have  a  Wisdom  score  
equal  to  at  least  10  +  the  spell  level  (Wis  11  for  1st-level  spells,  Wis  
12 for 2nd-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving 
throw  against  a  ranger’s  spell  is  10  +  the  spell  level  +  the  ranger’s  
Wisdom modifier. 
Like other spellcasters, a ranger can cast only a certain number of 
spells  of  each  spell  level  per  day.  His  base  daily  spell  allotment  is  
given  on  Table  3–13:  The  Ranger.  In  addition,  he  receives  bonus  
spells  per  day  if  he  has  a  high  Wisdom  score  (see  Table  1–1:  Ability  
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). When Table 3–13 indicates that 
the  ranger  gets  0  spells  per  day  of  a  given  spell  level  (for  instance,  
1st-level spells for a 4th-level ranger), he gains only the bonus spells 
he  would  be  entitled  to  based  on  his  Wisdom  score  for  that  spell  
level.  The  ranger  does  not  have  access  to  any  domain  spells  or  
granted powers, as a cleric does. 
A ranger prepares and casts spells the way a cleric does, though he 
cannot  lose  a  prepared  spell  to  cast  a  cure spell in its place. A ranger 
may prepare and cast any spell on the ranger spell list, provided that 
he  can  cast  spells  of  that  level,  but  he  must  choose  which  spells  to  
prepare during his daily meditation. 
Through  3rd  level,  a  ranger  has  no  caster  level.  At  4th  level  and  
higher, his caster level is one-half his ranger level. 
Improved Combat Style (Ex): At 6th level, a ranger’s aptitude in 
his  chosen  combat  style  (archery  or  two-weapon  combat)  improves.  
If  he  selected  archery  at  2nd  level,  he  is  treated  as  having  the  
Manyshot  feat  (page  97),  even  if  he  does  not  have  the  normal  
prerequisites for that feat. 
If  the  ranger  selected  two-weapon  combat  at  2nd  level,  he  is  
treated  as  having  the  Improved  Two-Weapon  Fighting  feat  (page  
96), even if he does not have the normal prerequisites for that feat. 
As  before,  the  benefits  of  the  ranger’s  chosen  style  apply  only  
when he wears light or no armor. He loses all benefits of his combat 
style when wearing medium or heavy armor. 
Woodland  Stride  (Ex):  Starting  at  7th  level,  a  ranger  may  move  
through  any  sort  of  undergrowth  (such  as  natural  thorns,  briars,  
overgrown   areas,   and   similar   terrain)   at   his   normal   speed   and   
without    taking    damage    or    suffering    any    other    impairment.    
However,  thorns,  briars,  and  overgrown  areas  that  are  enchanted  or  
magically manipulated to impede motion still affect him. 
Swift  Tracker  (Ex): Beginning at 8th level, a ranger can move at 
his  normal  speed  while  following  tracks  without  taking  the  normal  
–5  penalty.  He  takes  only  a  –10  penalty  (instead  of  the  normal  –20)  
when moving at up to twice normal speed while tracking. 
Evasion  (Ex):  At  9th  level,  a  ranger  can  avoid  even  magical  and  
unusual  attacks  with  great  agility.  If  he  makes  a  successful  Reflex  
saving throw against an attack that normally deals half damage on a 
successful  save  (such  as  a  red  dragon’s  fiery  breath  or  a  fireball),  he  
instead  takes  no  damage.  Evasion  can  be  used  only  if  the  ranger  is  
wearing light armor or no armor. A helpless ranger (such as one who 
is unconscious or paralysed) does not gain the benefit of evasion. 
Combat Style Mastery (Ex): At 11th level, a ranger’s aptitude in 
his  chosen  combat  style  (archery  or  two-weapon  combat)  improves  
again. If he selected archery at 2nd level, he is treated as having the 
Improved  Precise  Shot  feat  (page  96),  even  if  he  does  not  have  the  
normal prerequisites for that feat. 
If  the  ranger  selected  two-weapon  combat  at  2nd  level,  he  is  
treated  as  having  the  Greater  Two-Weapon  Fighting  feat  (page  95),  
even if he does not have the normal prerequisites for that feat. 
As  before,  the  benefits  of  the  ranger’s  chosen  style  apply  only  
when he wears light or no armor. He loses all benefits of his combat 
style when wearing medium or heavy armor. 
Camouflage  (Ex):  A  ranger  of  13th  level  or  higher  can  use  the  
Hide  skill  in  any  sort  of  natural  terrain,  even  if  the  terrain  doesn’t  
grant cover or concealment. 
Hide  in  Plain  Sight  (Ex):  While  in  any  sort  of  natural  terrain,  a  
ranger  of  17th  level  or  higher  can  use  the  Hide  skill  even  while  
being observed. 
 
Elf Ranger Starting Package 
Armor:  Studded  leather  (+3  AC,  armor  check  penalty  –1,  speed  
30 ft., 20 lb.). 
Weapons:  Longsword  (1d8,  crit  19–20/×2,  4  lb.,  one-handed,  
slashing). 
Short sword, off hand (1d6, crit 19–20/×2, 2 lb., light, piercing). 
Note:  When  striking  with  both  swords,  the  ranger  takes  a  –4  
penalty with his longsword and a –8 penalty with his short sword. If 
he  has  a  Strength  bonus,  add  only  one-half  of  it  to  his  damage  roll  
with  the  short  sword,  which  is  in  his  off  hand,  but  add  the  full  
Strength bonus to his damage roll with the longsword. 
Longbow (1d8, crit ×3, range inc. 100 ft., 3 lb., piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 6 + Int modifier. 
 
 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
49
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Survival                                        4                                        Wis                                        —                                        
Hide                                             4                                             Dex                                             –1                                             
Move Silently 4 Dex –1 
Listen                                           4                                           Wis                                           —                                           
Spot                                             4                                             Wis                                             —                                             
Knowledge (nature) 4 Int — 
Climb                                           4                                           Str                                           –1                                           
Heal                                             4                                             Wis                                             —                                             
Swim                                            4                                            Str                                            –2                                            
Search                                          4                                          Int                                          —
 
 
Feat: Point Blank Shot. 
Favored Enemy: Magical beast. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack, and flint and steel. Three torches. Quiver with 20 arrows. 
Gold: 2d4 gp. 
 
ROGUE 
Rogues  share  little  in  common  with  each  other.  Some  are  stealthy  
thieves.  Others  are  silver-tongued  tricksters.  Still  others  are  scouts,  
infiltrators, spies, diplomats, or thugs. What they share is versatility, 
adaptability,  and  resourcefulness.  In  general,  rogues  are  skilled  at  
getting  what  others  don’t  want  them  to  get:  entrance  into  a  locked  
treasure  vault,  safe  passage  past  a  deadly  trap,  secret  battle  plans,  a  
guard’s trust, or some random person’s pocket money. 
Adventures: Rogues adventure for the same reason they do most 
things:  to  get  what  they  can  get.  Some  are  after  loot;  others  want  
experience.  Some  crave  fame;  others  seek  infamy.  Quite  a  few  also  
enjoy  a  challenge.  Figuring  out  how  to  thwart  a  trap  or  avoid  an  
alarm is great fun for many rogues. 
Characteristics:  Rogues  are  highly  skilled,  and  they  can  con-
centrate on developing any of several categories of skills. While not 
equal  to  members  of  many  other  classes  in  combat,  a  rogue  knows  
how to hit where it hurts, and she can dish out a lot of damage with a 
sneak attack. 
Rogues  have  a  sixth  sense  when  it  comes  to  avoiding  danger.  
Experienced   rogues   develop   mystical   powers   and   skills   as   they   
master  the  arts  of  stealth,  evasion,  and  sneak  attacks.  In  addition,  
while not capable of casting spells on their own, rogues can “fake it” 
well  enough  to  cast  spells  from  scrolls,  activate  wands,  and  use  just  
about any other magic item. 
Alignment:   Rogues   follow   opportunity,   not   ideals.   They   are   
more  likely  to  be  chaotic  than  lawful,  they  are  a  diverse  bunch,  so  
they may be of any alignment. 
Religion:  Although  they  are  not  renowned  for  their  piety,  most  
rogues   revere   Olidammara   (god   of   thieves).   Evil   rogues   might   
secretly  worship  Nerull  (god  of  death),  or  Erythnul  (god  of  slaugh-
ter).  Since  rogues  are  so  diverse,  however,  many  of  them  worship  
other deities, or none at all. 
Background:   Some   rogues   are   officially   inducted   into   an   
organized  fellowship  of  rogues  or  “guild  of  thieves.”  Some  are  self-
taught; others learned their skills from independent mentors. Often, 
an experienced rogue needs an assistant for scams, second-story jobs, 
or  just  for  watching  her  back.  She  recruits  a  likely  youngster,  who  
then learns the skills of the trade on the job. Eventually, the trainee 
is ready to move on, perhaps because the mentor has run afoul of the 
law,  or  perhaps  because  the  trainee  has  double-crossed  her  mentor  
and needs some “space.” 
Rogues do not see each other as fellows unless they happen to be 
members  of  the  same  guild  or  students  of  the  same  mentor.  In  fact,  
rogues trust other rogues less than they trust anyone else. They’re no 
fools. 
Races:  Adaptable  and  often  unprincipled,  humans  take  to  the  
rogue’s   life   with   ease.   Halflings,   elves,   and   half-elves   also   find   
themselves  well  suited  to  the  demands  of  the  career.  Dwarf  and  
gnome  rogues,  while  less  common,  are  renowned  as  experts  with  
locks and traps. Half-orc rogues tend toward thuggery. 
Rogues are common among brutal humanoids, especially goblins 
and bugbears. Rogues who learn their arts in savage lands, however, 
generally  don’t  have  much  experience  with  complex  mechanisms  
such as traps and locks. 
Other  Classes:  Rogues  love  and  hate  working  with  members  of  
other classes. They excel when protected by warriors and supported 
by  spellcasters.  There  are  plenty  of  times,  however,  that  they  wish  
everyone  else  was  as  quiet,  guileful,  and  patient  as  they.  Rogues  are  
particularly  wary  of  paladins,  so  they  endeavor  to  prove  themselves  
useful when contact with paladins is unavoidable. 
Role:  The  rogue’s  role  in  a  group  can  vary  dramatically  based  on  
her  skill  selection—from  charismatic  con  artist  to  cunning  burglar  
to  agile  combatant—but  most  rogues  share  certain  aspects.  They  
aren’t   capable   of   prolonged   melee   combat,   so   they   focus   on   
opportunistic  sneak  attacks  or  ranged  attacks.  The  rogue’s  stealth  
and  her  trapfinding  ability  make  her  one  of  the  best  scouts  in  the  
game. 
Table 3–15: The Rogue 
                                    Base                                    Fort                                    Ref                                    Will                                    
Level                            Attack                            Bonus                            Save                             Save                             Save                            Special                            
    1st +0 +0 +2 +0 Sneak attack +1d6, trapfinding 
   2nd   +1   +0   +3   +0   Evasion   
   3rd +2 +1 +3 +1 Sneak attack +2d6, trap sense +1 
    4th    +3    +1    +4    +1    Uncanny    dodge    
    5th                           +3                                       +1                                +4                                +1                             Sneak   attack +3d6, Bonus Feat
    6th +4 +2 +5 +2 Trap sense +2 
    7th +5 +2 +5 +2 Sneak attack +4d6 
    8th +6/+1 +2 +6 +2 Improved uncanny dodge 
    9th +6/+1 +3 +6 +3 Sneak attack +5d6, trap sense +3 
  10th                           +7/+2                                 +3                                +7                                +3                             Special ability
, Bonus Feat
  11th +8/+3 +3 +7 +3 Sneak attack +6d6 
  12th +9/+4 +4 +8 +4 Trap sense +4 
  13th +9/+4 +4 +8 +4 Sneak attack +7d6, special ability 
  14th                           +10/+5                               +4                                +9                                +4                             —  
  15th                           +11/+6/+1                         +5                                +9                                +5                             Sneak   attack +8d6, trap sense +5, Bonus Feat
  16th  +12/+7/+2  +5  +10  +5  Special  ability  
  17th +12/+7/+2 +5 +10 +5 Sneak attack +9d6 
  18th +13/+8/+3 +6 +11 +6 Trap sense +6 
  19th +14/+9/+4 +6 +11 +6 Sneak attack +10d6, special ability 
  20th                           +15/+10/+5                       +6                               +12                               +6                             
—nus Feat
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
50 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Rogues have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:   Dexterity   provides   extra   protection   for   the   lightly   
armored  rogue.  Dexterity,  Intelligence  and  Wisdom  are  important  
for  many  of  the  rogue’s  skills.  A  high  Intelligence  score  also  gives  
the  rogue  extra  skill  points,  which  can  be  used  to  expand  her  
repertoire. 
Alignment: Any. 
Hit Die: d6. 
 
Class Skills 
The  rogue’s  class  skills  (and  the  key  ability  for  each  skill)  are  
Appraise  (Int),  Balance  (Dex),  Bluff  (Cha),  Climb  (Str),  Craft  
(Int),   Decipher   Script   (Int),   Diplomacy   (Cha),   Disable   
Device  (Int),  Disguise  (Cha),  Escape  Artist  (Dex),  Forgery  
(Int),  Gather  Information  (Cha),  Hide  (Dex),  Intimidate  
(Cha),  Jump  (Str),  Knowledge  (local)  (Int),  Listen  (Wis),  
Move  Silently  (Dex),  Open  Lock  (Dex),  Perform  (Cha),  
Profession   (Wis),   Search   (Int),   Sense   Motive   (Wis),   
Sleight   of   Hand   (Dex),   Spot   (Wis),   Swim   (Str),   
Tumble  (Dex),  Use  Magic  Device  (Cha),  and  
Use Rope (Dex). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill 
descriptions. 
Skill  Points  at  1st  Level:  (8  +  
Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill   Points   at   Each   Addi-
tional Level: 8 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All  of  the  following  are  class  features  of  the  
rogue. 
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Rogues 
are  proficient  with  all  simple  
weapons,     plus     the     hand     
crossbow,   rapier,   shortbow,   
and  short  sword.  Rogues  are  
proficient  with  light  armor,  
but not with shields. 
Sneak  Attack:  If  a  rogue  can  
catch  an  opponent  when  he  is  
unable    to    defend    himself    
effectively   from   her   attack,   
she can strike a vital spot for extra damage. Basically, 
the  rogue’s  attack  deals  extra  damage  any  time  her  target  
would  be  denied  a  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  (whether  the  target  
actually has a Dexterity bonus or not), or when the rogue flanks her 
target.  This  extra  damage  is  1d6  at  1st  level,  and  it  increases  by  1d6  
every  two  rogue  levels  thereafter.  Should  the  rogue  score  a  critical  
hit  with  a  sneak  attack,  this  extra  damage  is  not  multiplied.  (See  
Table   8–5:   Attack   Roll   Modifiers   and   Table   8–6:   Armor   Class   
Modifiers, page 151, for combat situations in which the rogue flanks 
an opponent or the opponent loses his Dexterity bonus to AC.) 
Ranged  attacks  can  count  as  sneak  attacks  only  if  the  target  is  
within  30  feet.  A  rogue  can’t  strike  with  deadly  accuracy  from  
beyond that range. 
With  a  sap  (blackjack)  or  an  unarmed  strike,  a  rogue  can  make  a  
sneak  attack  that  deals  nonlethal  damage  instead  of  lethal  damage.  
She cannot use a weapon that deals lethal damage to deal nonlethal 
damage  in  a  sneak  attack,  not  even  with  the  usual  –4  penalty,  
because  she  must  make  optimal  use  of  her  weapon  in  order  to  
execute a sneak attack. (See Nonlethal Damage, page 146.) 
A  rogue  can  sneak  attack  only  living  creatures  with  discernible  
anatomies—undead,   constructs,   oozes,   plants,   and   incorporeal   
creatures  lack  vital  areas  to  attack.  Any  creature  that  is  immune  to  
critical  hits  is  not  vulnerable  to  sneak  attacks.  The  rogue  must  be  
able to see the target well enough to pick out a vital spot and must be 
able to reach such a spot. A rogue cannot sneak attack while striking 
a creature with concealment (see page 152) or striking the limbs of a 
creature whose vitals are beyond reach. 
Trapfinding:  Rogues  (and  only  rogues)  can  use  the  Search  skill  
to  locate  traps  when  the  task  has  a  Difficulty  Class  higher  than  20.  
Finding  a  nonmagical  trap  has  a  DC  of  at  least  20,  or  higher  if  it  is  
well  hidden.  Finding  a  magic  trap  has  a  DC  of  25  +  the  level  of  the  
spell used to create it. 
Rogues  (and  only  rogues)  can  use  the  Disable  Device  skill  to  
disarm magic traps. A magic trap generally has a DC of 25 + the level 
of the spell used to create it. 
A rogue who beats a trap’s DC by 10 or more 
with  a  Disable  Device  check  can  study  a  
trap,  figure  out  how  it  works,  and  bypass  it  
(with her party) without disarming it. 
Evasion  (Ex):  At  2nd  level  and  higher,  a  
rogue  can  avoid  even  magical  and  unusual  
attacks   with   great   agility.   If   she   makes   a   
successful  Reflex  saving  throw  against  an  
attack  that  normally  deals  half  damage  on  
a  successful  save  (such  as  a  red  dragon’s  
fiery   breath   or   a   fireball),   she   
instead takes no damage. Evasion 
can  be  used  only  if  the  rogue  is  
wearing    light    armor    or    no    
armor. A helpless rogue (such as 
one    who    is    unconscious    or    
paralysed)   does   not   gain   the   
benefit of evasion. 
Trap Sense (Ex): At 3rd level, a rogue 
gains an intuitive sense that alerts her to 
danger  from  traps,  giving  her  a  +1  
bonus   on   Reflex   saves   made   to   
avoid traps and a +1 dodge bonus to 
AC  against  attacks  made  by  traps.  
These  bonuses  rise  to  +2  when  the  
rogue reaches 6th level, to +3 when 
she  reaches  9th  level,  to  +4  when  
she  reaches  12th  level,  to  +5  at  
15th,  and  to  +6  at  18th  level.  
Trap  sense  bonuses  gained  from  
multiple classes stack. 
Uncanny  Dodge  (Ex):  Starting  at  4th  level,  a  
rogue   can   react   to   danger   before   her   senses   would   
normally  allow  her  to  do  so.  She  retains  her  Dexterity  
bonus to AC (if any) even if she is caught flat-footed or struck by an 
invisible  attacker.  However,  she  still  loses  her  Dexterity  bonus  to  
AC if immobilized. 
If  a  rogue  already  has  uncanny  dodge  from  a  different  class  (a  
rogue  with  at  least  two  levels  of  barbarian,  for  example),  she  auto-
matically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below) instead. 
Improved  Uncanny  Dodge  (Ex): A rogue of 8th level or higher 
can  no  longer  be  flanked;  she  can  react  to  opponents  on  opposite  
sides  of  her  as  easily  as  she  can  react  to  a  single  attacker.  This  
defense   denies   another   rogue   the   ability   to   sneak   attack   the   
character  by  flanking  her,  unless  the  attacker  has  at  least  four  more  
rogue levels than the target does. 
If  a  character  already  has  uncanny  dodge  (see  above)  from  a  
second  class,  the  character  automatically  gains  improved  uncanny  
dodge  instead,  and  the  levels  from  the  classes  that  grant  uncanny  
dodge  stack  to  determine  the  minimum  rogue  level  required  to  
flank the character. 
Special  Abilities:  On  attaining  10th  level,  and  at  every  three  
levels thereafter (13th, 16th, and 19th), a rogue gains a special ability 
Illus. by J. Foster 
Lidda 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
51
of her choice from among the following options. 
Crippling  Strike  (Ex):  A  rogue  with  this  ability  can  sneak  attack  
opponents  with  such  precision  that  her  blows  weaken  and  hamper  
them. An opponent damaged by one of her sneak attacks also takes 2 
points  of  Strength  damage.  Ability  points  lost  to  damage  return  on  
their own at the rate of 1 point per day for each damaged ability. 
Defensive  Roll  (Ex):  The  rogue  can  roll  with  a  potentially  lethal  
blow  to  take  less  damage  from  it  than  she  otherwise  would.  Once  
per  day,  when  she  would  be  reduced  to  0  or  fewer  hit  points  by  
damage in combat (from a weapon or other blow, not a spell or spe-
cial  ability),  the  rogue  can  attempt  to  roll  with  the  damage.  To  use  
this  ability,  the  rogue  must  attempt  a  Reflex  saving  throw  (DC  =  
damage dealt). If the save succeeds, she takes only half damage from 
the  blow;  if  it  fails,  she  takes  full  damage.  She  must  be  aware  of  the  
attack and able to react to it in order to execute her defensive roll—
if she is denied her Dexterity bonus to AC, she can’t use this ability. 
Since  this  effect  would  not  normally  allow  a  character  to  make  a  
Reflex  save  for  half  damage,  the  rogue’s  evasion  ability  does  not  
apply to the defensive roll. 
Improved  Evasion  (Ex):  This  ability  works  like  evasion,  except  
that while the rogue still takes no damage on a successful Reflex 
saving throw against attacks such as a dragon’s breath weapon 
or   a   fireball,   henceforth   she   henceforth   takes   only   half   
damage on a failed save. A helpless rogue (such as one who 
is  unconscious  or  paralysed)  does  not  gain  the  benefit  of  
improved evasion. 
Opportunist (Ex): Once per round, the rogue 
can  make  an  attack  of  opportunity  against  
an  opponent  who  has  just  been  struck  for  
damage  in  melee  by  another  character.  
This  attack  counts  as  the  rogue’s  attack  
of  opportunity  for  that  round.  Even  a  
rogue  with  the  Combat  Reflexes  feat  
can’t use the opportunist ability more 
than once per round. 
Skill  Mastery:  The  rogue  becomes  so  
certain  in  the  use  of  certain  skills  that  
she  can  use  them  reliably  even  under  
adverse  conditions.  Upon  gaining  this  
ability,  she  selects  a  number  of  skills  
equal to 3 + her Intelligence modifier. 
When making a skill check with one 
of these skills, she may take 10 even 
if   stress   and   distractions   would   
normally  prevent  her  from  doing  
so.  A  rogue  may  gain  this  special  
ability  multiple  times,  selecting  
additional  skills  for  it  to  apply  
to each time. 
Slippery    Mind    (Ex):    This    
ability  represents  the  rogue’s  
ability  to  wriggle  free  from  
magical  effects  that  would  
otherwise control or compel her. If a rogue with slippery 
mind  is  affected  by  an  enchantment  spell  or  effect  and  
fails  her  saving  throw,  she  can  attempt  it  again  1  round  
later  at  the  same  DC.  She  gets  only  this  one  extra  chance  
to succeed on her saving throw. 
Feat:  A  rogue  may  gain  a  bonus  feat  in  place  of  a  
special ability. 
 
Halfling Rogue Starting Package 
Armor: Leather (+2 AC, speed 20 ft., 7-1/2 lb.). 
Weapons: Short sword (1d4, crit 19–20/×2, 1 lb., light, piercing). 
Light   crossbow   (1d6,   crit   19–20/×2,   range   inc.   80   ft.,   2   lb.,   
piercing). 
Dagger   (1d3,   crit   19–20/×2,   range   inc.   10   ft.,   1/2   lb.,   light,   
piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 8 + Int modifier. 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Move Silently 4 Dex 0 
Hide                                             4                                             Dex                                             0                                             
Spot                                             4                                             Wis                                             —                                             
Listen                                           4                                           Wis                                           —                                           
Search                                          4                                          Int                                          —                                          
Disable Device 4 Int — 
Open Lock 4 Dex — 
Climb                                           4                                           Str                                           0                                           
Use Magic Device 4 Cha — 
Sleight of Hand 4 Dex 0 
Decipher Script 4 Int — 
Bluff                                             4                                             Cha                                             —                                             
Intimidate                                    4                                    Cha                                    — 
 
Feat: Improved Initiative. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack,  and  flint  and  steel.  Thieves’  tools.  Hooded  lantern  and  three  
pints of oil. Case with 10 crossbow bolts. 
Gold: 4d4 gp. 
 
SORCERER 
Sorcerers    create    magic    the    
way a poet creates poems, with 
inborn       talent       honed       by       
practice. They have no books, no 
mentors,    no    theories—just    raw    
power that they direct at will. 
Some  sorcerers  claim  that  the  blood  
of  dragons  courses  through  their  veins.  
That   claim   may   even   be   true   in   some   
cases—it   is   common   knowledge   that   certain   
powerful dragons can take humanoid form and 
even  have  humanoid  lovers,  and  it’s  difficult  
to prove that a given sorcerer does not have 
a dragon ancestor. It’s true that sorcerers 
often have striking good looks, usually 
with  a  touch  of  the  exotic  that  hints  
at   an   unusual   heritage.   Others   
hold  that  the  claim  is  either  an  
unsubstantiated  boast  on  the  
part  of  certain  sorcerers  or  
envious    gossip    on    the    
part   of   those   who   lack   
the sorcerer’s gift. 
Adventures:          The          
typical  sorcerer  adventures  in  order  to  
improve his abilities. Only by testing 
his  limits  can  he  expand  them.  A  
sorcerer’s   power   is   inborn—part   of   
his soul. Developing this power is a quest 
in itself for many sorcerers, regardless of how 
they wish to use their power. 
Some  good  sorcerers  are  driven  by  the  
need   to   prove   themselves.   Marked   as   
different by their power, they seek to win 
a  place  in  society  and  to  prove  themselves  to  others.  Evil  sorcerers,  
however,  also  feel  themselves  set  apart  from  others—apart  and  
above.  They  adventure  to  gain  power  over  those  they  look  down  
upon. 
Hennet 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
52 
Characteristics:   Sorcerers   cast   spells   through   innate   power   
rather   than   through   careful   training   and   study.   Their   magic   is   
intuitive   rather   than   logical.   Sorcerers   know   fewer   spells   than   
wizards  do  and  acquire  powerful  spells  more  slowly  than  wizards,  
but  they  can  cast  spells  more  often  and  have  no  need  to  select  and  
prepare  their  spells  ahead  of  time.  Sorcerers  do  not  specialize  in  
certain schools of magic the way wizards sometimes do. 
 
Table 3–16: The Sorcerer 
 Base Fort Ref Will ——––————————— Spells per Day ——————————— 
Level     Attack     Bonus      Save      Save      Save     Special     0     1st        2nd        3rd         4th         5th     6th     7th     8th      9th     
       1st       +0       +0          +0          +2       Summon       familiar          5       3       —           —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
       2nd       +1       +0          +0          +3              6       4       —           —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
       3rd           +1                         +1         +1         +3                Bonus Feat                     6            5           —          —          —          —       —       —       —       —       
       4th       +2       +1          +1          +4              6       6       3       —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
       5th       +2       +1          +1          +4              6       6       4       —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
            6th           +3                         +2         +2         +5                
Bonus Feat                     6            6            5            3           —          —            —            —            —            —            
            7th            +3            +2            +2            +5                            6            6            6            4            —            —            —            —            —            —            
            8th            +4            +2            +2            +6                            6            6            6            5            3            —            —            —            —            —            
            9th           +4                         +3         +3         +6                Bonus Feat                      6            6            6            6            4           —            —            —            —            —            
10th            +5            +3            +3            +7                            6            6            6            6            5            3            —            —            —            —            
11th            +5            +3            +3            +7                            6            6            6            6            6            4            —            —            —            —            
12th           +6/+1                   +4         +4         +8                
Bonus Feat                      6            6            6            6            6            5         3            —            —            —            
13th            +6/+1            +4            +4            +8                            6            6            6            6            6            6            4            —            —            —            
14th            +7/+2            +4            +4            +9                            6            6            6            6            6            6            5            3            —            —            
15th           +7/+2                   +5         +5         +9                Bonus Feat                      6            6            6            6            6            6         6         4            —            —            
16th            +8/+3            +5            +5            +10                           6            6            6            6            6            6            6            5            3            —            
17th            +8/+3            +5            +5            +10                           6            6            6            6            6            6            6            6            4            —            
18th           +9/+4                   +6         +6        +11               
Bonus Feat                      6            6            6            6            6            6         6         6         5         3            
19th            +9/+4            +6            +6            +11                           6            6            6            6            6            6            6            6            6            4            
20th            +10/+5            +6            +6            +12                           6            6            6            6            6            6            6            6            6            6            
FAMILIARS 
Familiars  are  magically  linked  to  their  masters.  In  some  sense,  the  
familiar  and  the  master  are  practically  one  being.  That’s  why,  for
example,  the  master  can  cast  a  personal  range  spell  on  a  familiar  even
though he can normally cast such a spell only on himself. A familiar is a
normal  animal  that  gains  new  powers  and  becomes  a  magical  beast
when  summoned  to  service  by  a  sorcerer  or  wizard.  It  retains  the
appearance, Hit Dice, base attack bonus, base save bonuses, skills, and
feats  of  the  normal  animal  it  once  was,  but  it  is  treated  as  a  magical
beast instead of an animal for the purpose of any effect that depends on
its type. Only a normal, unmodified animal may become a familiar. Thus,
a druid/sorcerer can’t use her animal companion as a familiar. 
A  familiar  also  grants  special  abilities  to  its  master  (a  sorcerer  or  
wizard),  as  given  on  the  table  below.  These  special  abilities  apply  only
when the master and familiar are within 1 mile of each other. 
Levels  of  different  classes  that  are  entitled  to  familiars  (such  as
sorcerer  and  wizard)  stack  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  familiar  
abilities that depend on the master’s level. 
 
Familiar         Special         
Bat Master gains a +3 bonus on Listen checks 
Cat Master gains a +3 bonus on Move Silently checks 
Hawk Master gains a +3 bonus on Spot checks in bright light 
Lizard Master gains a +3 bonus on Climb checks 
Owl Master gains a +3 bonus on Spot checks in shadows 
Rat Master gains a +2 bonus on Fortitude saves 
Raven
1
 Master gains a +3 bonus on Appraise checks 
Snake
2
 Master gains a +3 bonus on Bluff checks 
Toad Master gains +3 hit points 
Weasel Master gains a +2 bonus on Reflex saves 
1 A raven familiar can speak one language of its master’s choice as a 
supernatural ability. 
2 Tiny viper. 
Familiar Basics:Use the basic statistics for a creature of the familiar’s 
kind, as given in the Monster Manual, but make the following changes: 
Hit Dice:For the purpose of effects related to number of Hit Dice, use 
the master’s character level or the familiar’s normal HD total, whichever 
is higher. 
Hit Points: The familiar has one-half the master’s total hit points (not 
including  temporary  hit  points),  rounded  down,  regardless  of  its  actual  
Hit  Dice.  For  example,  at  2nd  level,  Hennet  has  9  hit  points,  so  his  
familiar has 4. 
Attacks:Use the master’s base attack bonus, as calculated from all his 
classes.  Use  the  familiar’s  Dexterity  or  Strength  modifier,  whichever  is  
greater,  to  get  the  familiar’s  melee  attack  bonus  with  natural  weapons.  
Damage equals that of a normal creature of the familiar’s kind. 
Saving  Throws:  For  each  saving  throw,  use  either  the  familiar’s  base  
save  bonus  (Fortitude  +2,  Reflex  +2,  Will  +0)  or  the  master’s  (as  
calculated from all his classes), whichever is better. The familiar uses its 
own  ability  modifiers  to  saves,  and  it  doesn’t  share  any  of  the  other  
bonuses  that  the  master  might  have  on  saves  (from  magic  items  or
feats, for example). 
Skills:For  each  skill  in  which  either  the  master  or  the  familiar  has  
ranks, use either the normal skill ranks for an animal of that type or the 
master’s skill ranks, whichever are better. In either case, the familiar uses 
its  own  ability  modifiers.  Regardless  of  a  familiar’s  total  skill  modifiers,  
some  skills  (such  as  Craft)  may  remain  beyond  the  familiar’s  ability  to  
use. 
 
Familiar  Ability  Descriptions:  All  familiars  have  special  abilities  (or
impart  abilities  to  their  masters)  depending  on  the  master’s  combined  
level  in  classes  that  grant  familiars,  as  shown  on  the  table  below.  The  
abilities given on the table are cumulative.  
 
Natural Armor Adj.:The number noted here is an improvement to the 
familiar’s  existing  natural  armor  bonus.  It  represents  the  preternatural  
toughness of a spellcaster’s familiar. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
53
Since sorcerers gain their powers without undergoing the years of 
rigorous   study   that   wizards   go   through,   they   don’t   have   the   
background of arcane knowledge than most wizards have. However, 
they   do   have   more   time   to   learn   fighting   skills,   and   they   are   
proficient with simple weapons. 
Alignment: For a sorcerer, magic is an intuitive art, not a science. 
Sorcery  favors  the  free,  chaotic,  creative  spirit  over  the  disciplined  
mind, so sorcerers tend slightly toward chaos over law. 
Religion:  Some  sorcerers  favor  Boccob  (god  of  magic),  while  
others revere Wee Jas (goddess of death and magic). However, many 
sorcerers  follow  some  other  deity,  or  none  at  all.  (Wizards  typically  
learn  to  follow  Boccob  or  Wee  Jas  from  their  mentors,  but  most  
sorcerers  are  self-taught,  with  no  master  to  induct  them  into  a  
religion). 
Background:  Sorcerers  develop  rudimentary  powers  at  puberty.  
Their  first  spells  are  incomplete,  spontaneous,  uncontrolled,  and  
sometimes  dangerous.  A  household  with  a  budding  sorcerer  in  it  
may  be  troubled  by  strange  sounds  or  lights,  which  can  create  the  
impression that the place is haunted. Eventually, the young sorcerer 
understands  the  power  that  he  has  been  wielding  unintentionally.  
From  that  point  on,  he  can  begin  practicing  and  improving  his  
powers. 
Sometimes a sorcerer is fortunate enough to come under the care 
of  an  older,  more  experienced  sorcerer,  someone  who  can  help  him  
understand and use his new powers. More often, however, sorcerers 
are  on  their  own,  feared  by  erstwhile  friends  and  misunderstood  by  
family. 
Sorcerers  have  no  sense  of  identity  as  a  group.  Unlike  wizards,  
they  gain  little  by  sharing  their  knowledge  and  have  no  strong  
incentive to work together. 
Races:  Most  sorcerers  are  humans  or  half-elves,  but  the  innate  
talent  for  sorcery  is  unpredictable,  and  it  can  show  up  in  any  of  the  
common races. 
Arcane  spellcasters  from  savage  lands  or  from  among  the  brutal  
humanoids are more likely to be sorcerers than wizards. Kobolds are 
especially  likely  to  take  up  this  path,  and  they  are  fierce,  if  inar-
ticulate, proponents of the “blood of the dragons” theory. 
Other   Classes:   Sorcerers   find   that   they   have   the   most   in   
common  with  members  of  other  largely  self-taught  classes,  such  as  
druids  and  rogues.  They  sometimes  find  themselves  at  odds  with  
members  of  the  more  disciplined  classes,  such  as  paladins  and  
monks.  Since  they  cast  the  same  spells  as  wizards  but  do  so  in  a  
different  way,  they  sometimes  find  themselves  in  competition  with  
wizards. 
Role:  A  sorcerer  tends  to  define  his  role  based  on  his  spell  
selection. A sorcerer who focuses on damage-dealing spells becomes 
a  center  of  the  party’s  offensive  power.  Another  may  rely  on  more  
subtle  magics,  such  as  charms  and  illusions,  and  thus  take  a  quieter  
role.  A  party  with  a  sorcerer  should  strongly  consider  including  a  
second  spellcaster,  such  as  a  bard,  cleric,  druid,  or  even  a  wizard,  to  
make  up  for  the  sorcerer’s  lack  of  versatility.  Since  a  sorcerer  often  
has  a  powerful  presence  that  gives  him  a  way  with  people,  he  may  
serve as the “face” for an adventuring party, negotiating, bargaining, 
and  speaking  for  others.  The  sorcerer’s  spells  often  help  him  sway  
others or gain information, so he makes an excellent spy or diplomat 
for an adventuring party. 
Int: The familiar’s Intelligence score. Familiars are as smart as people,
though not necessarily as smart as smart people. 
Alertness  (Ex):  The  presence  of  the  familiar  sharpens  its  master’s
senses.  While  a  familiar  is  within  arm’s  reach,  the  master  gains  the
Alertness feat (page 89). 
Improved  Evasion  (Ex):  When  sub
jected  to  an  attack  that  normally
allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, a familiar takes no damage
if it makes a successful saving throw and half damage even if the saving
throw fails. 
Share  Spells:  At  the  master’s  option,  he  may  have  any  spell  (but  not
any  spell-like  ability)  he  casts  on  himself  also  affect  his  familiar.  The
familiar must be within 5 feet at the time of casting to receive the benefit.
If  the  spell  or  effect  has  a  duration  other  than  instantaneous,  it  stops
affecting  the  familiar  if  it  moves  farther  than  5  feet  away  and  will  not
affect  the  familiar  again  even  if  it  returns  to  the  master  before  the
duration expires. Additionally, the master may cast a spell with a target o
f
“You”  on  his  familiar  (as  a  touch  range  spell)  instead  of  on  himself.  A
master  and  his  familiar  can  share  spells  even  if  the  spells  normally  do
not affect creatures of the familiar’s type (magical beast). 
Empathic Link (Su): The master has an empathic link with his familiar
out  to  a  distance  of  up  to  1  mile.  The  master  cannot  see  through  the
familiar’s  eyes,  but  they  can  communicate  empathically.  Because  of  the
limited nature of the link, only general emotional content (such as fear,
hunger,  happiness,  curiosity)  can  be  communicated.  Note  that  the  low
Intelligence  of  a  low-level  master’s  familiar  limits  what  the  creature  is
able  to  communicate  or  understand,  and  even  intelligent  familiars  see
the  world  differently  from  humans,  so  misunderstandings  are  always
possible. 
Because of this empathic link, the master has the same connection to
an  item  or  place  that  his  familiar  does.  For  instance,  if  his  familiar  has  
seen a room, the master can teleport into that room as if he has seen it
too. 
Deliver Touch Spells (Su): If the master is 3rd level or higher, a familiar
can  deliver  touch  spells  for  him.  If  the  master  and  the  familiar  are  in
contact at the time the master casts a touch spell, he can designate his
familiar  as  the  “toucher.”  The  familiar  can  then  deliver  the  touch  spell
just  as  the  master  could.  As  usual,  if  the  master  casts  another  spell  
before the touch is delivered, the touch spell dissipates. 
Speak  with  Master  (Ex):If the master is 5th level or higher, a familiar 
and  the  master  can  communicate  verbally  as  if  they  were  using  a  
common  language.  Other  creatures  do  not  understand  the  communi-
cation without magical help. 
Speak with Animals of Its Kind (Ex):If the master is 7th level or higher, 
a familiar can communicate with animals of approximately the same kind 
as itself (including dire varieties): bats with bats, rats with rodents, cats 
with  felines,  hawks  and  owls  and  ravens  with  birds,  lizards  and  snakes  
with  reptiles,  toads  with  amphibians,  weasels  with  similar  creatures  
(weasels,  minks,  polecats,  ermines,  skunks,  wolverines,  and  badgers).  
Such  communication  is  limited  by  the  intelligence  of  the  conversing  
creatures. 
Spell  Resistance  (Ex):  If  the  master  is  11th  level  or  higher,  a  familiar  
gains  spell  resistance  equal  to  the  master’s  level  +  5.  To  affect  the  
familiar  with  a  spell,  another  spellcaster  must  get  a  result  on  a  caster  
level  check  (1d20  +  caster  level;  see  Spell  Resistance,  page  177)  that  
equals or exceeds the familiar’s spell resistance. 
Scry on Familiar (Sp):If the master is 13th level or higher, he may scry 
on his familiar (as if casting the scrying spell) once per day. 
 
Master                  Natural                  
Class Level Armor Adj. Int Special 
1st–2nd  +1  6  Alertness, improved evasion, 
   share spells, empathic link 
3rd–4th  +2  7  Deliver touch spells 
5th–6th  +3  8  Speak with master 
7th–8th  +4  9  Speak with animals of its kind 
9th–10th  +5  10  — 
11th–12th  +6  11  Spell resistance 
13th–14th  +7  12  Scry on familiar 
15th–16th  +8  13  — 
17th–18th  +9  14  — 
19th–20th  +10  15  — 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
54 
GAME RULE INFORMATION 
Sorcerers have the following game statistics. 
Abilities:  Charisma  determines  how  powerful  a  spell  a  sorcerer  
can  cast,  how  many  spells  he  can  cast  per  day,  and  how  hard  those  
spells  are  to  resist  (see  Spells,  below).  Like  a  wizard,  a  sorcerer  ben-
efits from high Dexterity and Constitution scores. 
Alignment: Any. 
Hit Die: d4. 
 
Class Skills 
The sorcerer’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Bluff 
(Cha),  Concentration  (Con),  Craft  (Int),  Knowledge  (arcana)  (Int),  
Profession  (Wis),  and  Spellcraft  (Int).  See  Chapter  4:  Skills  for  skill  
descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) × 4. 
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier. 
 
Table 3–17: Sorcerer Spells Known 
 ————————— Spells Known —–———————— 
Level     0       1st     2nd     3rd     4th     5th     6th     7th     8th      9th     
       1st       4         2        —       —       —       —       —       —       —       —       
       2nd       5         2        —       —       —       —       —       —       —       —       
       3rd       5         3        —       —       —       —       —       —       —       —       
       4th       6         3         1        —       —       —       —       —       —       —       
       5th       6         4         2        —       —       —       —       —       —       —       
       6th       7         4         2         1        —       —       —       —       —       —       
       7th       7         5         3         2        —       —       —       —       —       —       
         8th         8         5         3         2         1         —         —         —         —         —         
         9th         8         5         4         3         2         —         —         —         —         —         
10th         9         5         4         3         2         1         —         —         —         —         
11th         9         5         5         4         3         2         —         —         —         —         
12th         9         5         5         4         3         2         1         —         —         —         
13th         9         5         5         4         4         3         2         —         —         —         
14th         9         5         5         4         4         3         2         1         —         —         
15th         9         5         5         4         4         4         3         2         —         —         
16th         9         5         5         4         4         4         3         2         1         —         
17th         9         5         5         4         4         4         3         3         2         —         
18th         9         5         5         4         4         4         3         3         2         1         
19th         9         5         5         4         4         4         3         3         3         2         
20th         9         5         5         4         4         4         3         3         3         3
 
 
Class Features 
All of the following are class features of the sorcerer. 
Weapon  and  Armor  Proficiency:  Sorcerers  are  proficient  with  
all  simple  weapons.  They  are  not  proficient  with  any  type  of  armor  
or  shield.  Armor  of  any  type  interferes  with  a  sorcerer’s  arcane  
gestures, which can cause his spells with somatic components to fail. 
Spells:  A  sorcerer  casts  arcane  spells  (the  same  type  of  spells  
available to bards and wizards), which are drawn primarily from the 
sorcerer/wizard spell list (page 192). He can cast any spell he knows 
without preparing it ahead of time, the way a wizard or a cleric must 
(see below). 
To  learn  or  cast  a  spell,  a  sorcerer  must  have  a  Charisma  score  
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Cha 10 for 0-level spells, Cha 11 
for  1st-level  spells,  and  so  forth).  The  Difficulty  Class  for  a  saving  
throw against a sorcerer’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the sorcerer’s 
Charisma modifier. 
Like  other  spellcasters,  a  sorcerer  can  cast  only  a  certain  number  
of  spells  of  each  spell  level  per  day.  His  base  daily  spell  allotment  is  
given  on  Table  3–16:  The  Sorcerer.  In  addition,  he  receives  bonus  
spells per day if he has a high Charisma score (see Table 1–1: Ability 
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). 
A  sorcerer’s  selection  of  spells  is  extremely  limited.  A  sorcerer  
begins play knowing four 0-level spells (also called cantrips) and two 
1st-level  spells  of  your  choice.  At  each  new  sorcerer  level,  he  gains  
one  or  more  new  spells,  as  indicated  on  Table  3–17:  Sorcerer  Spells  
Known.  (Unlike  spells  per  day,  the  number  of  spells  a  sorcerer  
knows  is  not  affected  by  his  Charisma  score;  the  numbers  on  Table  
3–17 are fixed.) These new spells can be common spells chosen from 
the  sorcerer/wizard  spell  list  (page  192),  or  they  can  be  unusual  
spells  that  the  sorcerer  has  gained  some  understanding  of  by  study.  
For  example,  a  sorcerer  with  a  scroll  or  spellbook  detailing  an  
unusual  sorcerer/wizard  spell  (one  not  on  the  sorcerer/wizard  spell  
list  in  this  book)  could  select  that  spell  as  one  of  his  new  spells  for  
attaining  a  new  level,  provided  that  it  is  of  the  right  spell  level.  The  
sorcerer can’t use this method of spell acquisition to learn spells at a 
faster rate, however. 
Upon  reaching  4th  level,  and  at  every  even-numbered  sorcerer  
level after that (6th, 8th, and so on), a sorcerer can choose to learn a 
new  spell  in  place  of  one  he  already  knows.  In  effect,  the  sorcerer  
“loses”  the  old  spell  in  exchange  for  the  new  one.  The  new  spell’s  
level  must  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  spell  being  exchanged,  and  it  
must be at least two levels lower than the highest-level sorcerer spell 
the   sorcerer   can   cast.   For   instance,   upon   reaching   4th-level,   a   
sorcerer  could  trade  in  a  single  0-level  spell  (two  spell  levels  below  
the  highest-level  sorcerer  spell  he  can  cast,  which  is  2nd)  for  a  
different  0-level  spell.  At  6th  level,  he  could  trade  in  a  single  0-level  
or 1st-level spell (since he now can cast 3rd-level sorcerer spells) for 
a different spell of the same level. A sorcerer may swap only a single 
spell at any given level, and must choose whether or not to swap the 
spell at the same time that he gains new spells known for the level. 
Unlike  a  wizard  or  a  cleric,  a  sorcerer  need  not  prepare  his  spells  
in advance. He can cast any spell he knows at any time, assuming he 
has  not  yet  used  up  his  spells  per  day  for  that  spell  level.  For  
example,  at  1st  level,  the  sorcerer  Hennet  can  cast  four  1st-level  
spells   per   day—three   for   being   1st   level   (see   Table   3–16:   The   
Sorcerer), plus one thanks to his Charisma score of 15 (see Table 1–
1:  Ability  Modifiers  and  Bonus  Spells,  page  8).  However,  he  knows  
only  two  1st-level  spells:  magic  missile  and  sleep  (see  Table  3–17:  
Sorcerer  Spells  Known).  Thus,  on  any  given  day,  he  can  cast  some  
combination of the two spells a total of four times. He does not have 
to decide ahead of time which spells he’ll cast. 
Familiar:  A  sorcerer  can  obtain  a  familiar.  Doing  so  takes  24  
hours and uses up magical materials that cost 100 gp. A familiar is a 
magical  beast  that  resembles  a  small  animal  and  is  unusually  tough  
and intelligent. The creature serves as a companion and servant. 
The sorcerer chooses the kind of familiar he gets. As the sorcerer 
advances in level, his familiar also increases in power. 
If  the  familiar  dies  or  is  dismissed  by  the  sorcerer,  the  sorcerer  
must  attempt  a  DC  15  Fortitude  saving  throw.  Failure  means  he  
loses  200  experience  points  per  sorcerer  level;  success  reduces  the  
loss to one-half that amount. However, a sorcerer’s experience point 
total  can  never  go  below  0  as  the  result  of  a  familiar’s  demise  or  
dismissal.  For  example,  suppose  that  Hennet  is  a  3rd-level  sorcerer  
with  3,230  XP  when  his  owl  familiar  is  killed  by  a  bugbear.  Hennet  
makes  a  successful  saving  throw,  so  he  loses  300  XP,  dropping  him  
below 3,000 XP and back to 2nd level (see the Dungeon Master’s Guide 
for  rules  for  losing  levels).  A  slain  or  dismissed  familiar  cannot  be  
replaced  for  a  year  and  day.  A  slain  familiar  can  be  raised  from  the  
dead  just  as  a  character  can  be,  and  it  does  not  lose  a  level  or  a  
Constitution point when this happy event occurs. 
A  character  with  more  than  one  class  that  grants  a  familiar  may  
have only one familiar at a time. 
 
Human Sorcerer Starting Package 
Armor: None (speed 30 ft.). 
Weapons:  Shortspear  (1d6,  crit  ×2,  range  inc.  20  ft.,  3  lb.,  one-
handed, piercing). 
Light   crossbow   (1d8,   crit   19–20/×2,   range   inc.   80   ft.,   4   lb.,   
piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 3 + Int modifier. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
55
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Spellcraft                                      4                                      Int                                      —                                      
Concentration                              4                              Con                              —                              
Knowledge (arcana) 4 Int — 
Bluff                                             4                                             Cha                                             —                                             
Gather Information (cc) 2 Cha — 
Diplomacy (cc) 2 Cha — 
Hide (cc) 2 Dex 0 
Move Silently (cc) 2 Dex 0
 
 
Feat: Toughness. 
Bonus Feat: Combat Casting. 
Spells  Known:  0-level  spells—detect  magic, ghost  sound, light, read 
magic. 
1st-level spells—magic missile, sleep. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack,   and   flint   and   steel.   Hooded   lantern,   5   pints   of   oil.   Spell   
component pouch. Case with 10 crossbow bolts. 
Gold: 3d4 gp. 
 
WIZARDS 
A  few  unintelligible  words  and  fleeting  gestures  carry  more  power  
than  a  battleaxe,  when  they  are  the  words  and  gestures  of  a  wizard.  
These  simple  acts  make  magic  seem  easy,  but  they  only  hint  at  the  
time  the  wizard  must  spend  poring  over  her  spellbook  preparing  
each  spell  for  casting,  and  the  years  before  that  spent  in  appren-
ticeship to learn the arts of magic. 
Wizards  depend  on  intensive  study  to  create  their  magic.  They  
examine  musty  old  tomes,  debate  magical  theory  with  their  peers,  
and practice minor magics whenever they can. For a wizard, magic is 
not a talent but a difficult, rewarding art. 
Adventures: Wizards conduct their adventures with caution and 
forethought. When prepared, they can use their spells to devastating 
effect.  When  caught  by  surprise,  they  are  vulnerable.  They  seek  
knowledge, power, and the resources to conduct their studies. They 
may  also  have  any  of  the  noble  or  ignoble  motivations  that  other  
adventurers have. 
Characteristics:  The  wizard’s  strength  is  her  spells.  Everything  
else  is  secondary.  She  learns  new  spells  as  she  experiments  and  
grows  in  experience,  and  she  can  also  learn  them  from  other  wiz-
ards.  In  addition  to  learning  new  spells,  a  wizard  can,  over  time,  
learn to manipulate her spells so they go farther, work better, or are 
improved in some other way. 
Some  wizards  prefer  to  specialize  in  a  certain  type  of  magic.  
Specialization  makes  a  wizard  more  powerful  in  her  chosen  field,  
but  it  denies  her  access  to  some  of  the  spells  that  lie  outside  that  
field. (See School Specialization, page 57.) 
Like  a  sorcerer,  a  wizard  can  call  a  familiar—a  small,  magical  
animal companion that serves her. For some wizards, their familiars 
are their only true friends. 
Alignment:  Overall,  wizards  show  a  slight  tendency  toward  law  
over   chaos   because   the   study   of   magic   rewards   those   who   are   
disciplined.  Illusionists  and  transmuters,  however,  are  masters  of  
deception and change, respectively. They favor chaos over law. 
Religion:   Wizards   commonly   revere   Boccob   (god   of   magic).   
Some,  especially  necromancers  or  simply  more  misanthropic  wiz-
ards,  prefer  Wee  Jas  (goddess  of  death  and  magic).  Evil  necroman-
cers are known to worship Nerull (god of death). Wizards in general 
are more devoted to their studies than to their spiritual sides. 
Background: Wizards recognize each other as comrades or rivals. 
Even wizards from very different cultures or magical traditions have 
much  in  common  because  they  all  conform  to  the  same  laws  of  
magic.   Unlike   fighters   or   rogues,   wizards   see   themselves   as   
members  of  a  distinct,  if  diverse,  group.  In  civilized  lands  where  
wizards  study  in  academies,  schools,  or  guilds,  wizards  also  identify  
themselves  and  others  according  to  membership  in  these  formal  
organizations.  But  while  a  guild  magician  may  look  down  her  nose  
at a rustic wizard who learned his arts from a doddering hermit, she 
nevertheless can’t deny the rustic’s identity as a wizard. 
Races:  Humans  take  to  magic  for  any  of  various  reasons:  curios-
ity,  ambition,  lust  for  power,  or  just  personal  inclination.  Human  
wizards tend to be practical innovators, creating new spells or using 
old spells creatively. 
Elves are enthralled by magic, and many of them become wizards 
for  love  of  the  art.  Elf  wizards  see  themselves  as  artists,  and  they  
hold magic in high regard as a wondrous mystery, as opposed to the 
more pragmatic human wizards, who see magic more as a set of tools 
or tricks. 
Illusion  magic  comes  so  simply  to  gnomes  that  becoming  an  
illusionist is just natural to brighter and more talented ones. Gnome 
wizards  who  don’t  specialize  in  the  school  of  illusion  are  rare,  but  
they don’t suffer under any special stigma. 
Table 3–18: The Wizard 
 Base Fort Ref Will ——––————————— Spells per Day ——————————— 
Level     Attack     Bonus      Save      Save      Save     Special     0     1st        2nd        3rd         4th         5th     6th     7th     8th      9th     
       1st       +0       +0          +0          +2       Summon       familiar,       3       1       —           —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
                                                                              Scribe             scroll             
       2nd       +1       +0          +0          +3              4       2       —           —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
       3rd       +1       +1          +1          +3              4       2       1       —           —           —       —       —       —        —       
       4th           +2                         +1         +1         +4           
Bonus Feat                          4            3            2           —          —          —       —       —       —       —       
            5th            +2            +1            +1            +4           Bonus feat                     4           3            2            1            —            —            —            —            —            —            
            6th            +3            +2            +2            +5                        4            3            3            2            —            —            —            —            —            —            
            7th            +3            +2            +2            +5                        4            4            3            2            1            —            —            —            —            —            
            8th           +4                         +2         +2         +6           
Bonus Feat                           4            4            3            3            2           —            —            —            —            —            
            9th            +4            +3            +3            +6                        4            4            4            3            2            1            —            —            —            —            
10th            +5            +3            +3            +7            Bonus feat               4            4            4            3            3            2            —            —            —            —            
11th            +5            +3            +3            +7                        4            4            4            4            3            2            1            —            —            —            
12th           +6/+1                   +4         +4         +8           
Bonus Feat                           4            4            4            4            3            3         2            —            —            —            
13th            +6/+1            +4            +4            +8                        4            4            4            4            4            3            2            1            —            —            
14th            +7/+2            +4            +4            +9                        4            4            4            4            4            3            3            2            —            —            
15th            +7/+2            +5            +5            +9            Bonus feat                       4            4            4            4            4               4        3            2            1            —            
16th           +8/+3                   +5         +5        +10            
Bonus Feat                           4            4            4            4            4            4         3         3         2        —            
17th            +8/+3            +5            +5            +10                        4            4            4            4            4            4            4            3            2            1            
18th            +9/+4            +6            +6            +11                        4            4            4            4            4            4            4            3            3            2            
19th            +9/+4            +6            +6            +11                        4            4            4            4            4            4            4            4            3            3            
20th           +10/+5                 +6         +6        +12            Bonus feat
                          4            4            4            4            4            4         4         4         4         4            
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
56 
Half-elf  wizards  feel  both  the  elf’s  attraction  to  magic  and  the  
human’s  drive  to  conquer  and  understand.  Some  of  the  most  pow-
erful wizards are half-elves. 
Dwarf  and  halfling  wizards  are  rare  because  their  societies  don’t  
encourage the study of magic. Half-orc wizards are rare because few 
half-orcs have the brains necessary for wizardry. 
Drow  (evil,  subterranean  elves)  often  take  up  wizardry,  
but wizards are quite rare among the savage humanoids. 
Other   Classes:   Wizards   prefer   to   work   with   
members  of  other  classes.  They  love  to  cast  their  
spells  from  behind  strong  fighters,  to  “magic  up”  
rogues and send them out to scout, and to rely on 
the   divine   healing   of   clerics.   They   may   find   
members  of  certain  classes  (such  as  sorcerers,  
rogues,   and   bards)   to   be   not   quite   serious   
enough, but they’re not judgmental. 
Role: The wizard’s role depends somewhat on 
her spell selection, but most wizards share certain 
similarities  in  function.  They  are  among  the  most  
offensively minded of the spellcasting classes, with a 
broad  range  of  options  available  for  neutralizing  
enemies.  Some  wizards  provide  great  support  to  
their comrades by way of their spells, while others 
may   focus   on   divination   or   other   facets   of   
wizardry. 
 
GAME RULE 
INFORMATION 
Wizards     have     the     following     game     
statistics. 
Abilities:      Intelligence      deter-
mines   how   powerful   a   spell   a   
wizard can cast, how many spells 
she   can   cast,   and   how   hard   
those  spells  are  to  resist  (see  Spells,  below).  A  
high Dexterity score is helpful for a wizard, who 
typically  wears  little  or  no  armor,  because  it  
provides  her  with  a  bonus  to  Armor  Class.  A  
good  Constitution  score  gives  a  wizard  extra  
hit  points,  a  resource  that  she  is  otherwise  
very low on. 
Alignment: Any. 
Hit Die: d4. 
 
Class Skills 
The  wizard’s  class  skills  (and  the  key  ability  for  each  skill)  are  
Concentration  (Con),  Craft  (Int),  Decipher  Script  (Int),  Knowledge  
(all  skills,  taken  individually)  (Int),  Profession  (Wis),  and  Spellcraft  
(Int).   See   Chapter   4:   Skills   for   skill   
descriptions. 
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int 
modifier) × 4. 
Skill  Points  at  Each  Additional  
Level: 2 + Int modifier. 
 
Class Features 
All  of  the  following  are  class  features  
of the wizard. 
Weapon   and   Armor   Proficiency: 
Wizards  are  proficient  with  the  club,  
dagger,  heavy  crossbow,  light  crossbow,  
and quarterstaff, but not with any type of 
armor   or   shield.   Armor   of   any   type   
interferes   with   a   wizard’s   movements,   
which  can  cause  her  spells  with  somatic  
components to fail. 
Spells: A wizard casts arcane spells (the 
same  type  of  spells  available  to  sorcerers  
and  bards),  which  are  drawn  from  the  sor-
cerer/wizard  spell  list  (page  192).  A  wizard  
must  choose  and  prepare  her  spells  ahead  
of time (see below). 
To   learn,   prepare,   or   cast   a   spell,   the   
wizard   must   have   an   Intelligence   score   
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Int 10 for 
0-level  spells,  Int  11  for  1st-level  spells,  and  
so forth). The Difficulty Class for 
a  saving  throw  against  a  wizard’s  
spell  is  10  +  the  spell  level  +  the  
wizard’s Intelligence modifier. 
Like   other   spellcasters,   a   wizard   
can  cast  only  a  certain  number  of  
spells of each spell level per day. 
Her  base  daily  spell  allotment  
is  given  on  Table  3–18:  The  
Wizard.      In      addition,      she      
receives bonus spells per day if she 
has a high Intelligence score (see Table 1–1: 
Ability Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). 
ARCANE SPELLS AND ARMOR 
Wizards  and  sorcerers  do  not  know  how  to  wear  armor  effectively.  If
desired, they can wear armor anyway (though they’ll be clumsy in it), or
they can gain training in the proper use of armor (with the various Armor
Proficiency feats—light, medium, and heavy—and the Shield Proficiency
feat),  or  they  can  multiclass  to  add  a  class  that  grants  them  armor
proficiency  (see  Multiclass  Characters  later  in  this  chapter).  Even  if  a  
wizard  or  sorcerer  is  wearing  armor  with  which  he  or  she  is  proficient,
however, it might still interfere with spellcasting. 
Most  characters  have  a  difficult  time  casting  arcane  spells  while
wearing  armor  or  carrying  shields  (see  Arcane  Spell  Failure,  page  122).
The  armor  restricts  the  complicated  gestures  that  a  wizards  or  sorcerer
must make while casting any spell that has a somatic component (most
do).  To  find  the  arcane  spell  failure  chance  for  a  wizard  or  sorcerer
wearing a certain type of armor, see Table 7–6: Armor and Shields (page
123). 
By contrast, bards not only know how to wear light armor effectively, 
but they can also ignore the arcane spell failure chance for such armor. 
However, they too wear heavier armor ineffectively and must either learn 
to   wear   heavier   armor   via   the   appropriate   Armor   Proficiency   feat   
(medium or heavy) or add a class (such as fighter) that grants them such 
proficiency as a class feature. A bard wearing armor heavier than light or 
using  any  type  of  shield incurs  the  normal  arcane  spell  failure  chance,  
even if he becomes proficient with that armor. 
If a spell doesn’t have a somatic component, an arcane spellcaster can 
cast it with no problem while wearing armor. Such spells can also be cast 
even  if  the  caster’s  hands  are  bound  or  if  he  or  she  is  grappling  
(although   Concentration   checks   still   apply   normally).   Also,   the   
metamagic feat Still Spell allows a spellcaster to prepare or cast a spell at 
one spell level higher than normal without the somatic component. This 
also  provides  a  way  to  cast  a  spell  while  wearing  armor  without  risking  
arcane spell failure. See Chapter 5: Feats for more about metamagic feats 
such as Still S
pell.
Mialee 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
57
Unlike  a  bard  or  sorcerer,  a  wizard  
may  know  any  number  of  spells  (see  
Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook, 
page    179).    She    must    choose    and    
prepare   her   spells   ahead   of   time   by   
getting a good night’s sleep and spending 
1   hour   studying   her   spellbook.   While   
studying,  the  wizard  decides  which  spells  
to  prepare  (see  Preparing  Wizard  Spells,  
page 177). 
Bonus     Languages:     A     wizard     may     
substitute  Draconic  for  one  of  the  bonus  
languages  available  to  the  character  because  
of  her  race  (see  Chapter  2:  Races).  Many  
ancient  tomes  of  magic  are  written  in  
Draconic,  and  apprentice  wizards  often  
learn it as part of their studies. 
Familiar:   A   wizard   can   obtain   a   familiar   in   
exactly  the  same  manner  as  a  sorcerer  can.  See  the  
sorcerer    description    and    the    accompanying    
Familiars sidebar for details. 
Scribe  Scroll:  At  1st  level,  a  wizard  gains  
Scribe  Scroll  as  a  bonus  feat.  This  feats  enables  
her  to  create  magic  schools  (see  Scribe  Scroll,  page  99,  and  
Creating Magic Items, page 282 of the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide). 
Bonus  Feats:  At  5th,  10th,  15th,  and  20th  
level,  a  wizard  gains  a  bonus  feat.  At  each  
such    opportunity,    she    can    choose    a    
metamagic feat, an item creation feat, or 
Spell   Mastery.   The   wizard   must   still   
meet  all  prerequisites  for  a  bonus  feat,  
including caster level minimums. (See 
Chapter 5 for descriptions of feats and 
their prerequisites.) 
These  bonus  feats  are  in  addition  to  
the feat that a character of any class gets 
every  three  levels  (as  given  on  Table  
3–2: Experience and Level-Dependent Benefits, page 22). The wizard 
is  not  limited  to  the  categories  of  item  creation  feats,  metamagic  
feats, or Spell Mastery when choosing these feats. 
Spellbooks:  A  wizard  must  study  her  spellbook  
each  day  to  prepare  her  spells  (see  Preparing  Wizard  
Spells,  page  177).  She  cannot  prepare  any  spell  not  
recorded in her spellbook, except for read magic, which all 
wizards can prepare from memory. 
A    wizard    begins    play    with    a    spellbook    
containing all 0-level wizard spells (except those 
from  her  prohibited  school  or  schools,  if  any;  
see  School  Specialization,  page  57)  plus  three  
1st-level   spells   of   your   choice.   For   each   
point  of  Intelligence  bonus  the  wizard  has  
(see  Table  1–1:  Ability  Modifiers  and  
Bonus  Spells,  page  8),  the  spellbook  
holds one additional 1st-level spell 
of   your   choice.   At   each   new   
wizard  level,  she  gains  two  new  
spells of any spell level or levels that 
she   can   cast   (based   on   her   new   
wizard  level)  for  her  spellbook.  For  
example,  when  a  wizard  attains  5th  
level,  she  can  cast  3rd-level  spells.  
At  this  point,  she  can  add  two  new  
3rd-level  spells  to  her  spellbook,  or  one  
2nd-level   spell   and   one   3rd-level   
spell,  or  any  combination  of  two  
spells between 1st and 3rd level. At 
any   time,   a   wizard   can   also   add   
spells    found    in    other    wizards’    
spellbooks  to  her  own  (see  Adding  
Spells  to  a  Wizard’s  Spellbook,  page  
178). 
 
 
 
 
SCHOOL SPECIALIZATION 
A school is one of eight groupings of spells, each defined by a common
theme,  such  as  illusion  or  necromancy.  If  desired,  a  wizard  may
specialize  in  one  school  of  magic  (see  below).  Specialization  allows  a
wizard  to  cast  extra  spells  from  her  chosen  school,  but  she  then  never
learns  to  cast  spells  from  some  other  schools.  Essentially,  the  wizard
gains exceptional mastery over a single school by neglecting the study o
f
other schools. 
A  specialist  wizard  can  prepare  one  additional  spell  of  her  specialty
school per spell level each day. She also gains a +2 bonus on Spellcraft 
checks  to  learn  the  spells  of  her  chosen  school  (see  Adding  Spells  to  a
Wizard’s Spellbook, page 178). 
The  wizard  must  choose  whether  to  specialize  and,  if  she  does  so,
choose her specialty at 1st level. At this time, she must also give up two
other  schools  of  magic  (unless  she  chooses  to  specialize  in  divination;
see  below),  which  become  her  prohibited  schools.  For  instance,  if  she
chooses  to  specialize  in  con
juration,  she  might  decide  to  give  up
enchantment and necromancy, or evocation and transmutation. A wizard
can  never  give  up  divination  to  fulfill  this  requirement.  Spells  of  the
prohibited  school  or  schools  are  not  available  to  the  wizard,  and  she
can’t  even  cast  such  spells  from  scrolls  or  fire  them  from  wands.  She
may not change either her specialization or her prohibited schools later.
The   eight   schools   of   arcane   magic   are   ab
juration,   conjuration,
divination,  enchantment,  evocation,  illusion,  necromancy,  and  trans-
mutation.  Spells  that  do  not  fall  into  any  of  these  schools  are  called  
universal spells. 
Abjuration:Spells   that   protect,   block,   or   banish.   An   ab
juration 
specialist is called an abjurer. 
Conjuration:Spells  that  bring  creatures  or  materials  to  the  caster.  A  
conjuration specialist is called a conjurer. 
Divination:  Spells  that  reveal  information.  A  divination  specialist  is  
called a diviner. Unlike the other specialists, a diviner must give up only 
one other school. 
Enchantment:Spells  that  imbue  the  recipient  with  some  property  or  
grant the caster power over another being. An enchantment specialist is 
called an enchanter. 
Evocation:Spells  that  manipulate  energy  or  create  something  from  
nothing. An evocation specialist is called an evoker. 
Illusion:Spells that alter perception or create false images. An illusion 
specialist is called an illusionist. 
Necromancy:Spells that manipulate, create, or destroy life or life force. 
A necromancy specialist is called a necromancer. 
Transmutation:Spells that transform the recipient physically or change 
its properties in a more subtle way. A transmutation specialist is called a 
transmuter. 
Universal:Not  a  school,  but  a  category  for  spells  that  all  wizards  can  
learn.  A  wizard  cannot  select  universal  as  a  specialty  school  or  as  a  
prohibited school. Only a limited number of spells fall into this category.
Nebin 
[gnome 
illusionist] 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
58 
Elf Wizard Starting Package 
Armor: None (speed 30 ft.). 
Weapons:   Quarterstaff   (1d6/1d6,   crit   ×2,   4   lb.,   two-handed,   
bludgeoning). 
Light   crossbow   (1d8,   crit   19–20/×2,   range   inc.   80   ft.,   4   lb.,   
piercing). 
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 2 + Int modifier. 
 
Skill Ranks Ability    Armor Check Penalty 
Spellcraft                                      4                                      Int                                      —                                      
Concentration                              4                              Con                              —                              
Knowledge (arcana) 4 Int — 
Decipher Script 4 Int — 
Hide (cc) 2 Dex 0 
Move Silently (cc) 2 Dex 0 
Search (cc) 2 Int — 
Spot (cc) 2 Wis —
 
 
Feat: Toughness. 
School Specialization: None. 
Spellbook: All 0-level spells; plus charm person, summon monster I, 
and sleep;  plus  one  of  these  spells  of  your  choice  per  point  of  
Intelligence  bonus  (if  any):  cause  fear, color  spray, magic  missile,  and  
silent image. 
Gear:  Backpack  with  waterskin,  one  day’s  trail  rations,  bedroll,  
sack,  and  flint  and  steel.  Ten  candles,  map  case,  three  pages  of  
parchment,  ink,  inkpen.  Spell  component  pouch,  spellbook.  Case  
with 10 crossbow bolts. 
Gold: 3d6 gp. 
 
EXPERIENCE AND LEVELS 
Experience   points   (XP)   measure   how   much   your   character   has   
learned and how much he or she has grown in personal power. Your 
character earns XP by defeating monsters and other opponents. The 
DM assigns XP to the characters at the end of each adventure based 
on  what  they  have    accomplished.  Characters  accumulate  XP  from  
one adventure to another. When a character earns enough XP, he or 
she  attains  a  new  character  level  (see  Table  3–2:  Experience  and  
Level-Dependent Benefits, page 22). 
Advancing  a  Level:  When  your  character’s  XP  total  reaches  at  
least  the  minimum  XP  needed  for  a  new  character  level  (see  Table  
3–2), he or she “goes up a level.” For example, when Tordek obtains 
1,000  or  more  XP,  he  becomes  a  2nd-level  character.  As  soon  as  he  
accumulates  a  total  of  3,000  XP  or  higher  (2,000  more  than  he  had  
when  he  gained  2nd  level),  he  reaches  3rd  level.  Going  up  a  level  
provides the character with several immediate benefits (see below). 
A  character  can  advance  only  one  level  at  a  time.  If,  for  some  
extraordinary   reason,   a   character’s   XP   reward   from   a   single   
adventure  would  be  enough  to  advance  two  or  more  levels  at  once,  
he or she instead advances one level and gains just enough XP to be 
1  XP  short  of  the  next  level.  Any  excess  experience  points  are  not  
retained. For example, if Tordek has 5,000 XP (1,000 points short of 
4th  level)  and  gains  6,000  more,  he  would  normally  be  at  11,000  
XP—enough  for  5th  level.  Instead  he  attains  4th  level,  and  his  XP  
total stands at 9,999. 
Training and Practice: Characters spend time between adventures 
training,  studying,  or  otherwise  practicing  their  skills.  This  work  
consolidates  what  they  learn  on  adventures  and  keeps  them  in  top  
form.  If,  for  some  reason,  a  character  can’t  practice  or  train  for  an  
extended  time,  the  DM  may  reduce  XP  awards  or  even  cause  the  
character to lose experience points. 
 
 
 
LEVEL ADVANCEMENT 
Each character class description includes a table that shows how the 
class   features   and   statistics   increase   as   a   member   of   that   class   
advances  in  level.  When  your  character  attains  a  new  level,  make  
these changes. 
1. Choose Class: A typical character has only one class, and when 
he  or  she  attains  a  new  level,  it  is  a  new  level  in  that  class.  If  your  
character  has  more  than  one  class  or  wants  to  acquire  a  new  class,  
you choose which class goes up one level. The other class or classes 
stay at the previous level. (See Multiclass Characters, page 59.) 
2.   Base   Attack   Bonus:   The   base   attack   bonus   for   fighters,   
barbarians,  rangers,  and  paladins  increase  by  1  every  level.  The  base  
attack  bonus  for  other  characters  increases  at  a  slower  rate.  If  your  
character’s  base  attack  bonus  changes,  record  it  on  your  character  
sheet. 
3.   Base   Save   Bonuses:   Like   base   attack   bonuses,   base   save   
bonuses  improve  at  varying  rates  as  characters  increase  in  level.  
Check  your  character’s  base  save  bonuses  for  the  class  that  has  
advanced  in  level  to  see  if  any  of  them  have  increased  by  1.  Some  
base  save  bonuses  increase  at  every  even-numbered  level;  others  
increase at every level divisible by three. 
4. Ability Score: If your character has just attained 4th, 8th, 12th, 
16th,  or  20th  character  level,  choose  one  of  his  or  her  ability  scores  
and  raise  it  by  1  point.  (It’s  okay  for  a  score  to  go  above  18.)  It’s  the  
overall   character   level,   not   the   class   level,   that   counts   for   this   
adjustment. 
If your character’s Constitution modifier increases by 1 (see Table 
1–1: Ability Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8), add +1 to his or her 
hit  point  total  for  every  character  level  below  the  one  just  attained.  
For example, if you raise your character’s Constitution from 11 to 12 
at  4th  level,  he  or  she  gets  +3  hit  points  (one  each  for  1st,  2nd,  and  
3rd  levels).  Add  these  points  before  rolling  for  hit  points  (the  next  
step). 
5.  Hit  Points:  Roll  a  Hit  Die,  add  your  character’s  Constitution  
modifier,  and  add  the  total  roll  to  his  or  her  hit  points.  Even  if  the  
character  has  a  Constitution  penalty  and  the  roll  was  so  low  as  to  
yield a result of 0 or fewer hit points, always add at least 1 hip point 
upon gaining a new level. 
6.  Skill  Points:  Each  character  gains  skill  points  to  spend  on  
skills as detailed in the appropriate class description. For class skills, 
each skill point buys 1 rank, and a character’s maximum rank in the 
skill  is  his  or  her  character  level  +3.  For  cross-class  skills,  each  skill  
point only buys 1/2 rank, and the maximum rank in the skill is one-
half  that  of  a  class  skill  (don’t  round  up  or  down).  See  Table  3–2:  
Experience and Level-Dependent Benefits, page 22. 
If you have been “maxing out” a skill (putting as many skill points 
into  it  as  possible),  you  don’t  have  to  worry  about  calculating  your  
maximum  rank  with  it.  At  each  new  level,  you  can  always  assign  1  
skill point—and just 1—to any skill that you’re maxing out. (If it’s a 
cross-class skill, this point buys 1/2 rank.) 
Remember   that   you   buy   skills   based   on   the   class   you   have   
advanced  in,  so  that  only  those  skills  given  as  class  skills  for  that  
class can be purchased as class skills for this level, regardless of what 
other classes you may have levels in. 
Your  character’s  Intelligence  modifier  affects  the  number  of  skill  
points  he  or  she  gets  at  each  level  (see  Table  1–1:  Ability  Modifiers  
and   Bonus   Spells,   page   8).   This   rule   represents   an   intelligent   
character’s  ability  to  learn  faster  over  time.  Use  your  character’s  
current Intelligence score, including all permanent changes (such as 
inherent  bonuses,  ability  drains,  or  an  Intelligence  increase  gained  
at  step  4,  above)  but  not  any  temporary  changes  (such  as  ability  
damage,   or   enhancement   bonuses   gained   from   spells   or   magic   
items,  such  as  a  headband  of  intellect),  to  determine  the  number  of  
skill points you gain. 
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
59
7.   Feats:   Upon   attaining   3rd   level   and   at   every   third   level   
thereafter  (6th,  9th,  12th,  15th,  and  18th  level),  the  character  gains  
one feat of your choice (see Table 5–1: Feats, page 90). The character 
must meet any prerequisites for that feat in order to select it. As with 
ability  score  increases,  it  is  the  overall  character  level,  not  the  class  
level, that determines when a character gets a new feat. 
8.  Spells:  Spellcasting  characters  gain  the  ability  to  cast  more  
spells  as  they  advance  in  levels.  Each  class  description  for  a  spell-
casting  class  includes  a  Spells  per  Day  section  (on  the  class  table)  
that shows the base number of spells (without bonus spells for high 
ability  scores)  of  a  given  spell  level  that  a  character  can  cast  at  each  
class  level.  See  your  character’s  class  description  in  this  chapter  for  
details. 
9.  Class  Features:  Check  your  character’s  class  description  in  
this  chapter  for  any  new  capabilities  your  character  may  receive.  
Many  characters  gain  special  attacks  or  new  special  powers  as  they  
advance in levels. 
 
MULTICLASS CHARACTERS 
A  character  may  add  new  classes  as  he  or  she  progresses  in  level,  
thus  becoming  a  multiclass  character.  The  class  abilities  from  a  
character’s   different   classes   combine   to   determine   a   multiclass   
character’s   overall   abilities.   Multiclassing   improves   a   character’s   
versatility at the expense of focus. 
 
CLASS AND LEVEL FEATURES 
As  a  general  rule,  the  abilities  of  a  multiclass  character  are  the  sum  
of the abilities of each of the character’s classes. 
Level: “Character level” is a character’s total number of levels. It is 
used to determine when feats and ability score boosts are gained, as 
noted on Table 3–2: Experience and Level-Dependent Benefits (page 
22). 
“Class  level”  is  a  character’s  level  in  a  particular  class.  For  a  
character  whose  levels  are  all  in  the  same  class,  character  level  and  
class level are the same. 
Hit Points: A character gains hit points from each class as his or 
her  class  level  increases,  adding  the  new  hit  points  to  the  previous  
total.  For  example,  Lidda  the  halfling  began  as  a  rogue  and  attained  
4th   level,   then   added   levels   of   wizard   at   her   next   two   level   
advancements.  As  a  4th-level  rogue/2nd-level  wizard,  her  total  hit  
points are 6 + 1d6 + 1d6 + 1d6 + 1d4 + 1d4. 
Base  Attack  Bonus:  Add  the  base  attack  bonuses  acquired  for  
each class to get the character’s base attack bonus. A resulting value 
of  +6  or  higher  provides  the  character  with  multiple  attacks.  Find  
the  character’s  base  attack  bonus  on  Table  3–1:  Base  Save  and  Base  
Attack  Bonuses  (page  22)  to  see  how  many  additional  attacks  the  
character   gets   and   at   what   bonuses.   For   instance,   a   6th-level   
rogue/4th-level wizard would have a base attack bonus of +6 (+4 for 
the rogue class and +2 for the wizard class). A base attack bonus of +6 
allows a second attack with a bonus of +1 (given as +6/+1 on Table 3–
1), even though neither the +4 from the rogue levels nor the +2 from 
the wizard levels normally allows an extra attack. 
Saving   Throws:   Add   the   base   save   bonuses   for   each   class   
together. A 7th-level rogue/4th-level wizard has a +3 base save bonus 
on  Fortitude  saving  throws  (+2  as  a  7th-level  rogue  and  +1  as  a  4th-
level  wizard),  a  +6  on  Reflex  saving  throws  (+5  and  +1),  and  a  +6  on  
Will saving throws (+2 and +4). 
Skills:  If  a  skill  is  a  class  skill  for  any  of  a  multiclass  character’s  
classes,  then  character  level  determines  a  skill’s  maximum  rank.  
(The maximum rank for a class skill is 3 + character level.) 
If  a  skill  is  not  a  class  skill  for  any  of  a  multiclass  character’s  
classes,  the  maximum  rank  for  that  skill  is  one-half  the  maximum  
for a class skill. 
For  example,  a  7th-level  rogue/4th-level  wizard  (an  11th-level  
character)  can  have  as  many  as  14  ranks  in  any  skill  that  is  a  class  
skill for rogues or wizards. That same character can have as many as 
7 ranks in any skill that is not a class skill for rogues or wizards. 
Class  Features:  A  multiclass  character  gets  all  the  class  features  
of all his or her classes but must also suffer the consequences of the 
special  restrictions  of  all  his  or  her  classes.  (Exception:  A  character  
who  acquires  the  barbarian  class  does  not  become  illiterate.)    Some  
class  features  don’t  work  well  with  the  skills  or  class  features  of  
other classes. For example, although rogues are proficient with light 
armor,  a  rogue/wizard  still  has  an  arcane  spell  failure  chance  if  
wearing armor. 
In  the  special  case  of  turning  undead,  both  clerics  and  experi-
enced paladins have the same ability. If the character’s paladin level 
is  4th  or  higher,  her  effective  turning  level  is  her  cleric  level  plus  
her  paladin  level  minus  3.  Thus  a  5th-level  paladin/4th-level  cleric  
turns undead as a 6th-level cleric. 
In  the  special  case  of  uncanny  dodge,  both  experienced  bar-
barians  and  experienced  rogues  have  the  same  ability.  When  a  
barbarian/rogue  would  gain  uncanny  dodge  a  second  time  (for  her  
second  class),  she  instead  gains  improved  uncanny  dodge,  if  she  
does  not  already  have  it.  Her  barbarian  and  rogue  levels  stack  to  
determine  the  rogue  level  an  attacker  needs  to  flank  her.    For  
example,   a   2nd-level   barbarian/4th-level   rogue   could   only   be   
flanked by a rogue of at least 10th level. 
In  the  special  case  of  obtaining  a  familiar,  both  wizards  and  
sorcerers have the same ability. A sorcerer/wizard stacks his sorcerer 
and   wizard   levels   to   determine   the   familiar’s   natural   armor,   
Intelligence score, and special abilities. 
Feats:  A  multiclass  character  gains  a  feat  every  three  character  
levels, regardless of individual class level (see Table 3–2: Experience 
and Level Dependent Benefits, page 22). 
Ability  Increases:  A  multiclass  character  increases  one  ability  
score  by  1  point  every  four  character  levels,  regardless  of  individual  
class level (see Table 3–2: Experience and Level Dependent Benefits, 
page 22).. 
Spells:  The  character  gains  spells  from  all  of  his  or  her  spell-
casting  classes.  Thus,  an  experienced  ranger/druid  may  have  access  
to  the  spell  protection  from  elements  both  as  a  ranger  and  as  a  druid.  
Since  the  spell’s  effect  is  based  on  the  class  level  of  the  caster,  the  
player  must  keep  track  of  whether  the  character  is  preparing  and  
casting protection from elements as a ranger or as a druid. 
 
ADDING A SECOND CLASS 
When a character with one class gains a level, he or she may choose 
to increase the level of his or her current class or pick up a new class 
at  1st  level.  (A  character  can’t  gain  1st  level  in  the  same  class  more  
than  once,  even  if  this  would  allow  him  or  her  to  select  different  
class features, such as a different set of domains for a cleric.) The DM 
may restrict the choices available based on the way he or she handles 
classes,  skills,  experience,  and  training.  For  instance,  the  character  
may  need  to  find  a  tutor  to  teach  him  or  her  the  ways  of  the  new  
class.  Additionally,  the  DM  may  require  the  player  to  declare  what  
class the character is “working on” before he or she makes the jump 
to the next level, so the character has time to practice new skills. 
The  character  gains  the  1st-level  base  attack  bonuses,  base  save  
bonuses,  class  skills,  weapon  proficiency,  armor  and  shield  pro-
ficiencies, spells, and other class features of the new class, hit points 
of  the  appropriate  Hit  Die  type,  and  the  new  class’s  number  of  skill  
points gained at each additional level (not that number × 4, as is the 
case for a 1st level character). 
Picking  up  a  new  class  is  not  exactly  the  same  as  starting  a  char-
acter  in  that  class.  Some  of  the  benefits  a  1st-level  character  gains  
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
60 
(such  as  four  times  the  usual  number  of  skill  points)  represent  the  
advantage of training while the character was young and fresh, with 
lots  of  time  to  practice.  When  picking  up  a  new  class,  a  character  
does  not  receive  the  following  starting  bonuses  given  to  characters  
who begin their careers in that class: 
 Maximum hit points from the first Hit Die. 
 Quadruple the per-level skill points. 
 Starting equipment. 
 Starting gold. 
 
ADVANCING A LEVEL 
A  multiclass  character  who  attains  a  new  level  either  increases  one  
of his or her current class levels by one or picks up a new class at 1st 
level. 
When a multiclass character advances a level in a current class, he 
or   she   gets   all   the   standard   benefits   that   a   character   normally   
receives   for   attaining   that   level   in   that   class:   more   hit   points,   
possible  bonuses  on  attack  rolls,  Armor  Class  and  saving  throws  
(depending  on  the  class  and  the  new  level),  possible  new  class  
features  (as  defined  by  the  class),  possible  new  spells,  and  new  skill  
points. 
Skill  points  are  spent  according  to  the  class  that  the  multiclass  
character  just  advanced  in  (see  Table  4–1:  Skill  Points  per  Level,  
page  62).  Skills  purchased  from  Table  4–2:  Skills  are  purchased  at  
the cost appropriate for that class. 
Rules   for   characters   beyond   20th   level   (including   multiclass   
characters  beyond  20th  level)  are  covered  in  the  Dungeon  Master’s  
Guide. 
 
XP FOR MULTICLASS CHARACTERS 
Developing  and  maintaining  skills  and  abilities  in  more  than  one  
class  is  a  demanding  process.  Depending  on  the  character’s  class  
levels and race, he or she might or might not suffer an XP penalty. 
Even  Levels:  If  your  multiclass  character’s  classes  are  nearly  the  
same  level  (all  within  one  class  level  of  each  other),  then  he  or  she  
can  balance  the  needs  of  the  multiple  classes  without  penalty.  For  
instance,  a  4th-level  wizard/3rd-level  rogue  takes  no  penalty,  nor  
does a 2nd-level fighter/2nd-level wizard/3rd-level rogue. 
Uneven  Levels:  If  any  two  of  your  multiclass  character’s  classes  
are   two   or   more   levels   apart,   the   strain   of   developing   and   
maintaining  different  skills  at  different  levels  takes  its  toll.  Your  
multiclass character suffers a –20% penalty to XP for each class that 
is  not  within  one  level  of  his  or  her  highest-level  class.  These  
penalties apply from the moment the character adds a class or raises 
a  class’s  level  too  high.  For  instance,  a  4th-level  wizard/3rd-level  
rogue gets no penalty, but if that character raises his wizard level to 
5th,  then  he  takes  the  –20%  penalty  from  that  point  on  until  his  
levels were nearly even again. 
Races  and  Multiclass  XP:  A  favored  class  (see  the  individual  
race  entries  in  Chapter  2:  Races)  does  not  count  against  the  char-
acter for purposes of the –20% penalty to XP. In such cases, calculate 
the  XP  penalty  as  if  the  character  did  not  have  that  class.  For  
instance,   Bergwin   is   an   11th-level   gnome   character   (a   9th-level   
rogue/2nd-level bard). He takes no penalty to his XP because he has 
only one nonfavored class. (Bard is favored for gnomes.) Suppose he 
then  attains  12th  level  and  adds  1st  level  as  fighter  to  his  classes,  
becoming  a  9th-level  rogue/2nd-level  illusionist/1st-level  fighter.  
He then takes a –20% XP penalty on future XP he earns because his 
fighter level is so much lower than his rogue level. Were he awarded 
1,200  XP  for  an  adventure,  he  would  receive  only  80%  of  that  
amount, or 960 XP. If he thereafter rose to 13th level and picked up 
a fourth class (by adding 1st-level cleric, for example), he would take 
a –40% XP penalty from then on. 
As a second example, consider a dwarf 7th-level fighter/2nd-level 
cleric.  This  character  takes  no  penalty  because  his  fighter  class  is  
favored   for   dwarves   and   thus   not   counted   when   determining   
whether  his  classes  are  even.  Nor  does  he  take  any  penalty  for  
adding  1st-level  rogue  to  the  mix,  since  his  cleric  and  rogue  classes  
are  only  one  level  apart.  In  this  case,  cleric  counts  as  the  character’s  
highest class. 
A human’s or half-elf’s highest-level class is always considered his 
or her favored class. 
 
HOW MULTICLASSING WORKS 
Lidda, a 4th-level halfling rogue, decides to expand her repertoire by 
learning  some  wizardry.  She  locates  a  mentor  who  teaches  her  the  
ways  of  a  wizard,  and  she  spends  a  lot  of  time  looking  over  the  
shoulder  of  Mialee,  her  party’s  wizard,  while  the  latter  prepares  her  
spells each morning. When Lidda amasses 10,000 XP, she becomes a 
5th-level character. Instead of becoming a 5th-level rogue, however, 
she  becomes  a  4th-level  rogue/1st-level  wizard.  Now,  instead  of  
gaining the benefits of attaining a new level as a rogue, she gains the 
benefits of becoming a 1st-level wizard. She gains a wizard’s Hit Die 
(d4), a 1st-level wizard’s +2 bonus on Will saves, and 4 skill points (2 
for one wizard level and +2 for her Intelligence score of 14) that she 
can  spend  as  a  wizard.  These  benefits  are  added  to  the  scores  she  
already had as a rogue. Her base attack bonus, Reflex save bonus, and 
Fortitude  save  bonus  do  not  increase  because  these  numbers  are  +0  
for   a   1st-level   wizard.   She   gains   a   1st-level   wizard’s   beginning   
spellbook  and  spells  per  day.  Her  rogue  skills  and  sneak  attack  
capability, however, do not improve. She could spend some of her 4 
skill  points  to  improve  her  rogue  skills,  but,  since  they  would  be  
treated as cross-class skills for a wizard, these skill points would each 
buy  only  one-half  rank.  (The  exceptions  are  any  Craft  or  Profession  
skills  she  may  have,  since  Craft  and  Profession  are  class  skills  for  
both the rogue and the wizard.) 
On  reaching  15,000  XP,  she  becomes  a  6th-level  character.  She  
decides she’d like to continue along the wizard path, so she increases 
her  wizard  level  instead  of  her  rogue  level.  Again  she  gains  the  
wizard’s benefits for attaining a new level rather than the rogue’s. As 
a  2nd-level  wizard,  she  gains  another  d4  Hit  Die,  her  base  attack  
bonus  and  Will  save  bonus  each  go  up  by  +1,  she  gains  4  more  skill  
points,  and  she  can  now  prepare  another  0-level  spell  and  another  
1st-level  spell  each  day  (as  noted  on  Table  3–18:  The  Wizard).  
Additionally,  as  a  6th-level  character  overall  she  gets  her  third  feat  
(as  per  Table  3–2:  Experience  and  Level-Dependent  Benefits,  page  
22). 
At this point, Lidda is a 6th-level character: a 4th-level rogue/2nd-
level  wizard.  She  casts  spells  as  a  2nd-level  wizard  does,  and  she  
sneak  attacks  as  a  4th-level  rogue  does.  Her  combat  skill  is  a  little  
better  than  a  4th-level  rogue’s  would  be,  because  she  has  learned  
something  about  fighting  during  her  time  as  a  wizard.  (Her  base  
attack bonus went up +1 when she became a 2nd-level wizard.) Her 
base  Reflex  save  bonus  is  +4  (+4  from  her  rogue  class  and  +0  from  
her wizard class), better than a 6th-level wizard’s but not as good as a 
6th-level rogue’s. Her base Will save bonus is +4 (+1 from her rogue 
class  and  +3  from  her  wizard  class),  better  than  a  6th-level  rogue’s  
but not as good as a 6th-level wizard’s. 
At  each  new  level,  Lidda  must  decide  whether  to  increase  her  
rogue level or her wizard level. Of course, if she really wants to have 
diverse   abilities,   she   could   even   acquire   a   third   class—maybe   
fighter.
CHAPTER 3: 
CLASSES
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
idda the rogue can walk quietly up to a door, put her ear to it, and 
hear  the  troglodyte  priest  on  the  other  side  casting  a  spell  
on his pet crocodile. If Jozan the cleric were to try the same 
thing,  he’d  make  so  much  noise  that  the  troglodyte  would  
hear  him.  Jozan  could,  however,  identify  the  spell  that  the  
evil  priest  is  casting.  Actions  such  as  these  rely  on  the  skills  that  
characters have (in this case, Move Silently, Listen, and Spellcraft). 
 
SKILLS SUMMARY 
A  character’s  skills  represent  a  variety  of  abilities.  As  a  character  
advances  in  level,  he  or  she  gets  better  at  using  some  or  all  of  her  
skills. 
Getting  Skills: A character gets a base allotment of 2, 4, 6, or 8 
skill points for each new level, depending on the class to which that 
level  was  added.  If  the  character  gaining  his  or  her  1st  character  
level  overall  (that  is,  gaining  his  or  her  first  level  in  any  class),  add  
his or her Intelligence modifier to the base skill point allotment for 
the class and multiply the total by four; then add an extra 4 points of 
the character is human. 
If you buy a class skill (such as Listen for a rogue or Spellcraft for 
a  cleric),  your  character  gets  1  rank  (equal  to  a  +1  bonus  on  checks  
with  that  skill)  for  each  skill  point.  If  you  buy  other  classes’  skills  
(cross-class  skills),  you  get  1/2  rank  per  skill  point.  Your  maximum  
rank  in  a  class  skill  is  your  character  level  +  3.  Your  maximum  rank  
in  a  cross-class  skill  is  one-half  of  this  number  (do  not  round  up  or  
down). 
Using Skills: To make a skill check, roll: 
1d20 + skill modifier 
(Skill modifier = skill rank + ability modifier 
+ miscellaneous modifiers) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  roll  works  just  like  an  attack  roll  or  a  saving  throw—the  
higher  the  roll,  the  better.  Either  you’re  trying  to  match  or  
exceed    a  certain  Difficulty  Class  (DC),  or  you’re  trying  to  beat  
another  character’s  check  result.  For  instance,  to  sneak  quietly  
past a guard, Lidda needs to beat the guard’s Listen check result 
with her own Move Silently check result. 
Skill  Ranks:  A  character’s  number  of  ranks  in  a  skill  is  
based  on  how  many  skill  points  a  character  has  invested  in  a  
skill.  Many  skills  can  be  used  even  if  the  character  has  no  
ranks  in  them;  doing  this  is  called  making  an  untrained  skill  
check. 
Ability   Modifier:  The  ability  modifier  used  in  a  skill  
check  is  the  modifier  for  the  skill’s  key  ability  (the  ability  
associated with the skill’s use). The key ability of each skill is 
noted in its description and on Table 4–2: Skills. 
Miscellaneous    Modifiers:    Miscellaneous    modifiers    
include  racial  bonuses,  armor  check  penalties,  and  bonuses  
provided by feats, among others. 
 
ACQUIRING SKILL RANKS 
Ranks  indicate  how  much  training  or  experience  your  
character  has  with  a  given  skill.  Each  of  his  or  her  skills  
has a rank, from 0 (for a skill in which your character has 
no training at all) to a number equal to 3 + character level 
(for a character who has increased a skill to its maximum 
rank).  When  making  a  skill  check,  you  add  your  skill  ranks  
to the roll as part of the skill modifier, so the more ranks you 
have, the higher your skill check result will be. 
 
 
61

 
 
62 
Ranks  tell  you  how  proficient  your  are  and  reflect  your  training  
in  a  given  skill.  In  general,  while  anyone  can  get  a  lucky  roll,  a  
character  with,  say,  10  ranks  in  a  given  skill  has  a  higher  degree  of  
training  and  expertise  in  that  skill  than  a  character  with  9  ranks  or  
fewer. 
The  class  starting  packages  in  Chapter  3  provide  an  easier  way  to  
select   1st-level   skills,   because   they   assume   that   you   max   out   
(increase  to  maximum  rank)  each  skill  you  buy  and  because  they  
provide  a  shorter  list  from  which  to  choose.  Although  selecting  
skills from a starting package feels very different from buying them 
rank by rank, your character winds up spending the same number of 
skill points no matter which way you select 1st-level skills. 
The  Skills  paragraph  on  page  59  covers  the  skill  acquisition  rules  
for multiclass characters. 
 
Table 4–1: Skill Points per Level 
                                      1st-level                                      Higher-level                                      
Class                          Skill                          Points
1
                         Skill                         Points
2
 
Barbarian (4 + Int modifier) × 4 4 + Int modifier 
Bard (6 + Int modifier) × 4 6 + Int modifier 
Cleric (2 + Int modifier) × 4 2 + Int modifier 
Druid (4 + Int modifier) × 4 4 + Int modifier 
Fighter (2 + Int modifier) × 4 2 + Int modifier 
Monk (4 + Int modifier) × 4 4 + Int modifier 
Paladin (2 + Int modifier) × 4 2 + Int modifier 
Ranger (6 + Int modifier) × 4 6 + Int modifier 
Rogue (8 + Int modifier) × 4 8 + Int modifier 
Sorcerer (2 + Int modifier) × 4 2 + Int modifier 
Wizard (2 + Int modifier) × 4 2 + Int modifier 
1 Humans add +4 to this total at 1st level. 
2 Humans add +1 each level.
 
 
ACQUIRING SKILLS AT 1ST LEVEL 
Follow these two steps to pick skills for your 1st-level character: 
1. Determine the number of skill points your character gets. This 
number  depends  on  his  or  her  class  and  Intelligence  modifier,  as  
shown  on  Table  4–1:  Skill  Points  per  Level.  For  example,  Lidda  is  a  
1st-level  halfling  rogue  with  an  Intelligence  score  of  14  (+2  Int  
modifier). At the start of play, she has 40 skill points to spend (8 + 2 = 
10, 10 × 4 = 40). 
A character gets at least 4 skill points (1 × 4 = 4) at 1st level, even if 
he or she has an Intelligence penalty. 
A human gets 4 extra skill points as a 1st-level character. A human 
character  with  the  same  class  and  Intelligence  modifier  as  Lidda  
would have 44 skill points at the start of play. 
2.  Spend  the  skill  points.  Each  skill  point  you  spend  on  a  class  
skill gets you 1 rank in that skill. Class skills are the skills found on 
your character’s class skill list. Each skill point you spend on a cross-
class skill gets your character 1/2 rank in that skill. Cross-class skills 
are skills not found on your character’s class skill list. (Half ranks do 
not improve your skill check, but two 1/2 ranks make 1 rank.) Your 
maximum rank in a class skill is 4. In a cross-class skill, it’s 2. 
Table 4–2: Skills shows all the skills and indicates which are class 
skills and which are cross-class skills for each class. 
Spend all your skill points. You can’t save them to spend later. 
 
SKILLS AT HIGHER LEVELS 
When  your  character  attains  a  new  level,  follow  these  steps  to  gain  
new skills and improve those he or she already has: 
1.  Determine  the  number  of  skill  points  your  character  gets.  See  
Table 4–1: Skill Points per Level. 
A character gets at least 1 skill point at each new level, even if he 
or she has an Intelligence penalty. 
A human gets 1 extra skill point per level. 
2.  You  can  improve  any  class  skill  that  you’ve  previously  maxed  
out  by  1  rank  or  any  cross-class  skill  that  you’ve  previously  maxed  
out by 1/2 rank. 
3.  If  you  have  not  maxed  out  a  skill,  you  can  spend  extra  skill  
points on it and increase its rank further. 
First,  find  out  what  your  character’s  maximum  rank  in  that  skill  
is. If it’s a class skill, the maximum rank is the character’s new level + 
3. If it’s a cross-class skill, the maximum rank is half of that number 
(do not round up or down). 
You may spend the number of skill points it takes to max out the 
skill, provided that you have that many skill points to spend. 
4.  If  you  want  to  pick  up  a  new  skill  for  your  character,  you  can  
spend  skill  points  equal  to  his  or  her  character  level  +3.  These  skill  
points buy 1 rank each if the new skill is a class skill or 1/2 rank each 
if it’s a cross-class skill. 
Regardless  of  whether  a  skill  is  purchased  as  a  class  skill  or  a  
cross-class skill, if it is a class for any of your classes, your maximum 
rank equals your total character level +3. 
 
USING SKILLS 
When your character uses a skill, you make a skill check to see how 
well  he  or  she  does.  The  higher  the  result  of  the  skill  check,  the  
better. Based on the circumstances, your result must match or beat a 
particular number (a DC or the result of an opposed skill check) for 
the  check  to  be  successful.  The  harder  the  task,  the  higher  the  
number you need to roll. 
Circumstances  can  affect  your  check.  A  character  who  is  free  to  
work  without  distractions  can  make  a  careful  attempt  and  avoid  
simple  mistakes.  A  character  who  has  lots  of  time  can  try  over  and  
over  again,  thereby  assuring  the  best  outcome.  If  others  help,  the  
character may succeed where otherwise he or she would fail. 
CHARACTER SKILLS 
When  you  create  your  character,  you  will  probably  only  be  able  to
purchase  ranks  in  a  handful  of  skills.  It  may  not  seem  as  though  you
have  as  many  skills  as  real  people  do—but  the  skills  on  your  character
sheet don’t actually define everything your character can do. 
Your  character  may  have  solid  familiarity  with  many  skills,  without
having the actual training that grants skill ranks. Knowing how to strum a
few chords on a lute or clamber over a low fence doesn’t really mean you
have ranks in Perform or Climb. Ranks in those skills represent training
beyond  everyday  use—the  ability  to  impress  an  audience  with  a  wide
repertoire  of  songs  on  the  lute,  or  to  successfully  scale  a  100-foot-high  
cliff face. 
So  how  do  normal  people  get  through  life  without  ranks  in  a  lot  o
f
skills?  For  starters,  remember  that  not  every  use  a  skill  requires  a  skill
check. Performing routine tasks in normal situations is generally so easy 
that no check is required. And when a check might be called for, the DC 
of most mundane tasks rarely exceeds 10, let alone 15. In day-to-day life, 
when  you  don’t  have  enemies  breathing  down  your  neck  and  your  life  
depending  on  success,  you  can  take  your  time  and  do  things  right—
making it easy, even without any ranks in the requisite skill, to succeeed 
(see Checks without Rolls, page 65). 
You’re  always  welcome  to  assume  that  your  character  is  familiar  
with—even  good  at,  as  far  as  everyday  tasks  go—many  skills  beyond  
those  for  which  you  actually  gain  ranks.  The  skills  you  buy  ranks  in,  
however, are those with which you have truly heroic potential. 