CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
161
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
the organization. These suggestions should never usurp 
a sense of character choice, but remember that a char
-
acter is much more likely to feel at home as part of an 
organization if her personality matches the majority of 
the organization’s members.
  Typical  Member: 
A  short  description  of  a  typical 
member of the organization.
  Prestige Classes: 
The prestige classes held by mem
-
bers, their relative frequency and importance to the guild, 
and guidelines on how important it is for a member of 
the organization to eventually join a particular prestige 
class.
  Lore of the Guild: 
An unusual aspect of the guild, 
such as a legend or story about the group, a famous (or 
infamous) member, the origin of the guild, or a com
-
monly held misconception about the organization.
  A Guild Campaign: 
A brief description of how a cam
-
paign might work if the majority of the player characters 
were members of the guild in question. When appropri
-
ate, it discusses ways for an adventuring group to act as 
an official part of the organization and the requirements 
and benefits of such an arrangement.
Sample Organization Member
Each description ends with a statistics block for a repre
-
sentative member of the organization.
BLACKLOCK LORESEEKERS
Formerly  a  small  collection  of  rogues  and  wizards 
dedicated to unearthing lost scraps of knowledge, the 
Blacklock Loreseekers have become a large and powerful 
organization of adventurers. The guild has chapterhouses 
in nearly every major city and many large towns, as well 
as in smaller outposts in outlying communities. As it 
has grown, the guild has become more focused on the 
mercantile aspects of adventuring, finding lost tombs 
and ancient artifacts with an eye toward profit rather 
than knowledge.
  The  Blacklock  Loreseekers  take  their  name  from 
the guild’s founder, a dwarf adventurer by the name of 
Kurgarn Blacklock. Kurgarn long sought leads to the 
whereabouts of an artifact held sacred by his clan, and 
after he grew too old to continue adventuring himself, 
he formed the loreseekers to guide the efforts of younger 
mercenaries. Although Kurgan always saw the organiza
-
tion as primarily focused on amassing knowledge, in the 
long years since his death, the guild has become far more 
concerned with the acquisition and resale of valuable 
treasures and magic items.
  Although  the  Loreseekers’  focus  on  profit  makes 
some  suspicious  of  their  motives,  the  group  remains 
an  adventuring-oriented  organization  and  does  not 
engage  in  thievery  or 
other  criminal  activi
-
ties. The guild offers its 
members ready access 
to adventuring leads of all kinds, and 
its  minimal  entrance  requirements 
make it an excellent way for young 
explorers  to  find  like-minded  souls 
and learn of challenges suited to their 
limited experience.
  Joining  the  Blacklock  Lore
-
seekers: 
The Blacklock Loreseekers 
require  that  members  pay  a  10  gp 
annual  fee  and  register  the  name  of 
their adventuring group. All members 
of a party must be members of the guild 
for any of the characters to gain the 
benefits described below.
  Character Benefits: 
Loreseeker-
affiliated adventuring groups gain a 
5% discount on lodging in any city 
with  a  Loreseekers  chapterhouse, 
access  to  the  many  small  libraries 
maintained  in  these  chapterhouses, 
a ready source of adventuring leads 
and, perhaps most importantly, maps. 
The Loreseekers actively collect maps, 
and members are free to copy (but not 
remove)  maps  stored  in  the  chapterhouse  libraries. 
Members also can treat any community with a chap
-
terhouse as one size larger for purposes of determining 
the  community’s  gold  piece  limit.  (See  page  137  of 
the 
Dungeon  Master’s  Guide
  for  more  information  on 
community size and gold piece spending limits.) This 
benefit allows members to sell more valuable items in 
smaller  communities,  and  often  presents  them  with 
more purchasing options as well.
  The guild is particularly good at making the heroic 
work of its members known to the common folk, and 
the DM should award small circumstance bonuses on 
the  Diplomacy  and  Intimidate  checks  made  by  guild 
members against those who have heard of their exploits. 
In general, these bonuses should never be more than +2 
and shouldn’t be awarded until the member has advanced 
to 6th level or higher.
  Roleplaying  Suggestions: 
Most  members  of  the 
Blacklock  Loreseekers  adventure  because  they  hope 
to grow rich from the treasure they find, and the guild 
heavily stresses the mercantile aspects of adventuring. 
Most guild members 
prefer  to  have  some 
guaranteed  pay  for 
their  efforts,  and 
often  seek  rich  or  noble  patrons. 
In  roleplaying  situations,  a  guild 
member is likely to look for ways to 
profit from an adventuring group’s 
efforts  and  emphasize  that  the 
danger  of  adventuring  must  come 
with reward.
   A  small  portion  of  the  guild, 
mostly comprising low-level wiz
-
ards  and  bards,  still  focuses  its 
efforts  on  amassing  knowledge. 
These  members  are  typically  qui
-
eter, bookish sorts who travel with 
other guild members for physical 
protection during adventures and 
for  the  benefits  that  the  guild 
provides.
  Typical Member: 
The typical 
Blacklock  Loreseeker  is  a  low-
level rogue, fighter, or warrior 
who has completed one or two 
small  adventuring  goals  and 
decided to join the guild. The 
membership  includes  several  powerful  adventurers 
and adventuring groups, many of whom are now more 
focused on individual goals and interests than on the 
guild’s. Although most members have a level or two in 
the three classes mentioned, the guild includes a broad 
range of individuals with levels in nearly every character 
class. Many rangers join to act as overland guides and to 
gain access to the guild’s excellent maps, but virtually 
no druids are members.
  Although the group takes its name from an individual, 
many chapterhouses have started to feature black locks 
on their doors as a sign of their allegiance to the guild. 
This recent trend started well after the death of Kurgarn 
Blacklock, and it is not yet a reliable way to identify a 
chapterhouse.
Blacklock 
 
Loreseekers 
 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
EMPHASIZING AN ORGANIZATION 
 
WITHIN A CAMPAIGN
Creating interesting and consistent organizations adds a great 
deal to a campaign world, but a DM must choose when and 
how to introduce such organizations very carefully. If they are 
mentioned too often, these organizations might become more 
important in the player’s eyes than the DM intends, but if they 
are  relegated  to  the  background  and  not  mentioned  enough, 
players forget them quickly and the DM’s work in incorporating 
them into the world becomes wasted effort. Here are a few ways 
to gracefully include reminders of an organization’s importance 
and flavor in a campaign.
 
Rumors:
 Entirely under the DM’s control, rumors of a guild’s 
activity can remind players of a guild’s importance, provide ad
-
venture opportunities, and remind characters who belong to the 
organization that they have concerns beyond the needs of their 
own adventuring group.
 
Leadership Feat: 
Any character who belongs to an organiza
-
tion should gain cohorts and followers who also belong to the 
organization.
 
Architecture and Geography: 
Merely mentioning that the char
-
acters are passing the compound of the Order of Illumination 
as they travel through a town reminds them that the organiza
-
tion has an important role in the community and the campaign. 
Taking time to describe its size or its architecture gives the play
-
ers further clues about the group, and such details make them 
more likely to remember the organization when they encounter 
it in a later adventure.
 
NPCs: 
Nonplayer  characters  are  the  most  useful  tool  to 
convey the importance of an organization, and they can help a 
DM describe or emphasize a group in several ways.
 
Small Favors: 
Because NPCs are the most noticeable represen
-
tatives of an organization, players will come to trust a group of 
NPC members to do them small favors because of that affilia
-
tion. For example, an innkeeper who is clearly affiliated with the 
Daggerspell Guardians might allow the player characters to stay 
at a 5% discount—even if they’re not members themselves—if 
they have helped the organization or have done notable good 
deeds in the past.
 
Small Hindrances:
 Like those who do small favors for the party, 
NPCs who pose small (noncombat) hindrances because of their 
affiliations build the feel and flavor of the organization quickly
.
 
Aspiring  Members:
  One  of  the  best  ways  to  emphasize  an 
organization in a campaign is to present a visible example of 
the kind of person who would want to join the group. The eager 
young paladin who wants to join the Order of Illumination might 
emphasize the organization’s extreme approach to law and righ
-
teousness and the somewhat naïve outlook that accompanies 
their approach.
 
Former Members:
 Another great way to highlight an organiza
-
tion is to present one of its castoffs. Whether this means intro
-
ducing an exile who returns to take revenge or a more complex 
figure whose departure was more amicable, an NPC who is a 
former member of an organization provides an excellent way to 
clarify the group’s stance on subtle points or emphasize how the 
group punishes those who violate its ideals or laws.
 
Buyers of Extra Loot:
 A subtle way to make an organization’s 
presence felt is to have its members buy the PCs’ extra loot. If 
the Nightsong Guild buys all fifteen of the masterwork rapiers 
that the adventurers hauled out of the last dungeon, it reminds 
the party of the guild’s presence without overemphasizing their 
importance.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs


162
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
163
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
  Prestige Classes: 
Although no specifi c prestige class 
is associated with the Blacklock Loreseekers, members do 
tend toward certain choices. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the 
loremaster prestige class is popular among the high-level 
wizards and clerics affi liated with the guild. Likewise, 
the many members with levels in rogue aspire to the 
dungeon delver prestige class.
  Lore of the Guild: 
The 
key of night,
 an artifact that 
was  long  sought  by  founder  Kurgarn  Blacklock,  was 
once the focus of the guild’s efforts, and new members 
still dream of unlocking its great power. The guild has 
pursued many rumors of the key’s whereabouts since its 
founding, and has met with many frustrating failures. 
The best information that the guild has on the key now 
points to one of two locations: the hoard of the black 
dragon Iyriddelmirev (described in  
Draconomicon
) or 
the ruins of the ancient drow city Neggazzoth. Both the 
dragon and the ruined drow city are formidable enough 
challenges that no Loreseeker-affi liated adventurers have 
tried to verify these theories.
  A Blacklock Loreseeker Campaign: 
The Blacklock 
Loreseekers  accept  members  of  all  classes  and  levels, 
making the organization an easy way to fi nd and form 
an adventuring group. For this reason, the Loreseekers 
provide an excellent way to begin a campaign and to unite 
the characters. Although the guild has a relatively simple 
agenda (buying and selling the proceeds of its members’ 
adventures), it can provide an interesting backdrop for a 
campaign  of  any  level.  Its 
ability to provide adventure 
leads  is  limitless,  and  the 
characters’ differing motivations for adventuring should 
provide an interesting contrast to the guild’s interests 
throughout the campaign.
Sample Blacklock Loreseeker
 
Fidran:
 Human male rogue 3; CR 3; Medium human-
oid; HD 3d6+3; hp 16; Init +2; Spd 30 ft.; AC 17, touch 
12, fl at-footed 15; Base Atk +2; Grp +3; Atk or Full Atk 
+5 melee (1d6+1/19–20, masterwork short sword) or +5 
ranged (1d6+1/
×
3, masterwork composite shortbow); SA 
sneak attack +2d6; SQ evasion, trap sense +1, trapfi nding; 
AL N; SV Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +3; Str 13, Dex 15, Con 12, 
Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8.
 
Skills  and  Feats:
  Climb  +6,  Craft  (stonemasonry)  +6, 
Disable Device +6, Hide +7, Knowledge (dungeoneering) 
+3, Spot +4, Move Silently +7, Open Lock +8, Search +6, 
Spot +10; Alertness, Blind-Fight, Weapon Finesse.
  Language:
 Common.
Sneak Attack (Ex):
 Fidran deals an extra 2d6 points 
of damage on any successful attack against fl at-footed or 
fl anked targets, or against a target that has been denied 
its  Dexterity  bonus  for  any  reason.  This  damage  also 
applies to ranged attacks against targets up to 30 feet away. 
Creatures with concealment, creatures without discern-
ible anatomies, and creatures immune to extra damage 
from critical hits are all immune to sneak attacks. Fidran 
can choose to deliver nonlethal damage with his sneak 
attack, but only when using a weapon designed for that 
purpose, such as a sap (blackjack).
  Evasion (Ex):
 If Fidran is exposed to any effect that 
normally allows him to attempt a Refl ex saving throw 
for half damage, he takes no damage with a successful 
saving throw.
 
Trapfi nding:
 Fidran can fi nd, disarm, or bypass traps 
with a DC of 20 or higher. He can use the Search skill 
to fi nd, and the Disable Device skill to disarm, magic 
traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used to create it). If 
his Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 10 or 
more, he discovers how to bypass the trap without 
triggering or disarming it.
 
Possessions: +1 chain shirt,
 masterwork short sword, 
masterwork composite shortbow (+1 Str bonus) with 
20 arrows, 
potion of cure moderate wounds,
 35 gp.
THE BLOODHOUNDS
The organization known as the Bloodhounds is dedicated 
to  fi nding  people  and  bringing  them  to  justice  (or 
whatever fate awaits them). Some members limit 
themselves  to  tracking  down  criminals;  others 
are willing to hunt anyone for a client who can pay the 
price. The group’s leaders don’t concern themselves with 
such issues, only with maintaining the organization’s 
reputation as the place to go to fi nd someone.
  Bloodhounds can take any assignments they choose. 
Some jobs come directly from clients who contact indi-
vidual members. Others come through the grapevine, 
since members pass word to each other. Individuals are 
fi ercely competitive, and if one succeeds where another 
has failed, the winner 
gloats over the victory. 
In fact, members often 
tell each other about the as-
signments  they’ve  taken, 
in effect challenging 
 to  beat  them  to 
the  mark  (their 
quarry).  Mem-
bers  may  work 
together, but most 
work  alone  or 
with nonmembers 
so that word spreads 
of  their  personal  fame. 
Thus, whenever several 
Bloodhounds form a pos-
se to catch a particularly 
elusive foe, word spreads 
far and wide.
  Despite  this  rivalry, 
when  a  mark  is  too 
important  to  go  free, 
a member can spread 
the  word  of  a  “free” 
bounty  among  the  Bloodhounds.  This 
means that any member who brings in the mark can 
claim the prize. Members who spread free bounties lose 
no face in the organization for doing so.
  Bloodhounds resent the concept of giving their earn-
ings to anyone. Thus, the organization does not demand 
a portion of its members’ income. No offi cial guildhalls 
or strongholds exist because no self-respecting member 
would limit herself to one base of operations.
  Since so many of the group’s marks are human, rang-
ers who have taken humans as favored enemies have an 
advantage in assignments. As a result, a large percentage of 
the membership is nonhuman, and differing alignments 
are rarely an impediment to teaming up. In fact, rumor 
has it that a good-aligned female elf and an evil-aligned 
male gnoll regularly work together, since between them 
they can function in any society. The gulf between their 
alignments is spanned by the bridge of their common 
goals.
  Joining  the  Bloodhounds: 
Membership  in  the 
Bloodhounds is by invitation only. Members report on 
capable  trackers  they  encounter  in  their  travels,  and 
from these reports, the organization’s leaders select can-
didates for membership. A member of the group tracks 
each candidate surrep-
titiously for a while. If 
the agent reports that 
the candidate has the nec-
essary fervor and talents, 
the leaders offer 
her a chance 
to try out for 
membership. 
A candidate who 
actually notices 
an  agent  fol-
lowing her is 
almost  guaran-
teed an offer.
   To  be  accepted  for 
membership,  the  can-
didate  must  track  a 
member  considerably 
more experienced than 
herself.  The  quarry 
makes  the  job  diffi-
cult by leaving false 
trails,  telling  locals 
deceitful stories, and 
even  hiring  brigands  to  ambush  the 
candidate along the way. The member must not assist 
the candidate in this task; otherwise, the test is void. A 
candidate who succeeds in fi nding the target passes the 
test and may join the organization.
  Character Benefi ts: 
Player characters who belong to 
the Bloodhounds gain access to many adventure leads, 
potentially lucrative commissions, and a loose network 
of allied trackers. Although the Bloodhounds organiza-
tion as a whole does not take a stand in moral or political 
matters, the group still serves as a useful meeting place 
for like-minded adventurers.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Bloodhounds are direct 
but cautious in their personal interactions. They make 
a habit of sizing up every creature they meet, because 
Bloodhounds symbol
Illus. by D. Kovacs
Illus. by C. Lukacs


164
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
165
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
anyone might someday be a mark. This attitude can make 
them seem distant, and the solitary lives that most lead 
reinforce this impression.
  Typical Member: 
Almost all Bloodhounds have at least 
one level of ranger, and most are single-class rangers of 
5th to 8th level. The organization has a small membership, 
but each individual is a capable survivalist and tracker.
  Prestige Classes: 
The bloodhound prestige class is 
greatly favored by members of the organization. The few 
who attain high levels in that class serve as the standard 
by which other trackers are judged. Members who work 
in exclusively urban areas sometimes prefer the vigilante 
prestige class, which offers excellent information-gather
-
ing abilities that often are more useful in a setting where 
physical tracks and the like are easily obscured.
  Lore of the Guild: 
The Bloodhounds have a nearly 
unblemished record, having successfully caught every 
mark they’ve pursued except for a half-dragon sorcerer 
named Zerin the Flayed. Zerin has used a combination 
of  powerful  spells  and  physical  might  to  elude  three 
high-level Bloodhounds, two of which he managed to 
slay over the course of prolonged and exhausting battles. 
Unwilling  to  throw  lives  away,  the  guild  leadership 
continues  to  ponder  ways  to  complete  the  dangerous 
commission without asking for outside assistance and 
thereby weakening the guild’s reputation.
  A  Bloodhound  Campaign: 
An  organization  as 
results-oriented  as  the  Bloodhounds  lends  itself  to  a 
campaign in many ways. In a campaign with one or more 
guildmember  PCs,  several  adventures  should  involve 
pursuing marks on behalf of the guild, but deviating 
from this formula is also important. Because they never 
give up on a mark, the Bloodhounds also make excellent 
antagonists for mid- to high-level adventurers. Constant 
pursuit by experienced trackers can make even the most 
powerful party feel harried and troubled. However, the 
Bloodhounds are best used as a recurring minor threat 
rather than as the major antagonist of a campaign.
Sample Bloodhound
 
Sharla  Redbow:
  Female  half-elf  ranger  5;  CR  5; 
Medium humanoid (elf); HD 5d8+5; hp 31; Init +3; Spd 
30 ft.; AC 17, touch 13, flat-footed 14; Base Atk +5; Grp +6; 
Atk +7 melee (2d6+1/19–20, masterwork greatsword) or 
+9 ranged (1d8+1/
×
3, 
+1 composite longbow
); Full Atk +7 
melee (2d6+1/19–20, masterwork greatsword) or +7/+7 
ranged  (1d8+1/
×
3, 
+1  composite  longbow
);  SA  favored 
enemy humans +4, favored enemy orcs +2; SQ animal 
companion (riding dog), animal companion benefits, half-
elf traits, low-light vision, wild empathy +4 (+0 magical 
beasts); AL NG; SV Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +3; Str 12, Dex 
16, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Diplomacy +1, Gather Information +7, 
Hide +11, Listen +6, Move Silently +11, Search +8, Spot 
+11,  Survival  +10  (+12  following  tracks);  Endurance
B
, 
Investigator, Point Blank Shot, Rapid Shot
B
, Track
B
.
  Languages:
 Common, Elven.
 
Favored Enemy (Ex):
 Sharla gains a +4 bonus on her 
Bluff, Listen, Sense Motive, Spot, and Survival checks 
when using these skills against humans. She gains the 
same bonus on weapon damage.
  Against orcs, she gains a +2 bonus on these skill checks 
and on weapon damage rolls.
 
Animal Companion (Ex):
 Sharla has a war-trained 
riding dog named Dauntless as an animal companion. 
Dauntless’s abilities and characteristics are summarized 
below.
 
Animal Companion Benefits:
 Sharla and Dauntless 
enjoy the link and share spells special qualities.
 
Link (Ex):
 Sharla can handle Dauntless as a free action. 
She also gains a +4 circumstance bonus on all wild empa
-
thy checks and Handle Animal checks made regarding 
her riding dog.
 
Share Spells (Ex):
 Sharla can have any spell she casts on 
herself also affect Dauntless if the latter is within 5 feet 
at the time. She can also cast a spell with a target of “You” 
on her animal companion.
 
Half-Elf Traits:
 Half-elves have immunity to magic 
sleep effects. For all effects related to race, a half-elf is 
considered an elf.
 
Ranger  Spell  Prepared
  (caster  level  2nd):  1st—
long
-
strider
.
 
Possessions:
 Mithral shirt, masterwork greatsword, 
+1 
composite longbow 
(+1 Str bonus), 10 cold iron arrows, 9 
silver arrows, 1 
+1 holy arrow,
 17 gp.
 
Dauntless,  Riding  Dog  Companion:
  CR  —; 
Medium animal; HD 2d8+4; hp 13; Init +2; Spd 40 ft.; 
AC 16, touch 12, flat-footed 14; Base Atk +1; Grp +3; Atk 
+3 melee (1d6+3, bite); Full Atk +3 melee (1d6+3, bite); 
SA trip; SQ bonus trick, low-light vision, scent; AL N; 
SV Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +1; Str 15, Dex 15, Con 15, Int 2, 
Wis 12, Cha 6.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Jump +8, Listen +5, Spot +5, Survival 
+1  (+5  when  tracking  by  scent),  Swim  +3;  Alertness, 
Track
B
.
 
Trip  (Ex):
  A  war-trained  riding  dog  that  hits  with  a 
bite attack can attempt to trip the opponent (+1 check 
modifier) as a free action without making a touch attack 
or provoking attacks of opportunity. If the attempt fails, 
the opponent cannot react to trip the dog.
 
Tricks: 
Dauntless knows the following tricks (including 
his bonus trick): assist attack†, assist track†, attack, down, 
heel, stay, track.
  † New trick described on page 100
.
 
Scent (Ex): 
Can detect approaching enemies, sniff out 
hidden foes, and track by sense of smell. See page 314 of 
the 
Monster Manual
.
COLLEGE OF 
CONCRESCENT LORE
This bardic college, one of the largest in ex
-
istence, focuses on the acquisition of hidden 
lore, particularly of the historical or magi
-
cal variety. Its members eagerly page 
through dusty tomes, seeking to 
uncover secrets about long-
dead  societies,  strange 
magical  rituals,  and 
other  unusual  top
-
ics. A council of three 
administrators  runs  the 
college. Each has been a 
member for ten years or 
more  and  embraced  at 
least three fields of study 
during  that  time.  These 
three  no  longer  conduct 
active  research  and  instead 
review  others’  findings,  dis
-
tribute reports, and maintain the 
membership list.
 
History  and  magical  lore  are  the 
bread and butter of this college. Many of 
the world’s greatest historians are at least 
adjunct  members,  and  several  powerful 
wizards have joined the college to gain ac
-
cess to its magic texts. The study of history here 
has an archeological bent, and members focus 
on understanding the languages, architecture, 
rituals, and leaders of lost civilizations.
  All significant member findings, from new discoveries 
to the results of long-term studies, are circulated to col
-
leagues with relevant specialties. Thus, a member who 
specializes in Kreidikan history might receive field notes 
from  an  expedition  to  a  newly  discovered  Kreidikan 
ruin, a translation of a poem that mentions a Kreidikan 
sorcerer-king,  and  a  fragment  of  the 
fountain  of  blood
 
spell that Kreidikan mages favor, all in the same month. 
Exactly who receives the results of particularly important 
research is currently the subject of bitter debate—some 
researchers are livid because they did not receive copies 
of studies they thought were vital to their own research. 
The college also has a strict policy that prohibits sharing 
research  results  with  anyone  outside 
the college. Centuries ago, this “no 
eyes but the learned” policy caused 
a split in the organization that led 
to the formation of the Talespinners 
League (see page 182
).
   “Until we accumulate infinity” is the 
college’s  motto.  Collegians  wear  dark 
robes  with  red  stripes  encircling  the 
upper sleeves.
 
The  College  of  Concrescent 
Lore maintains a friendly rival
-
ry with a similar group, the 
College of Arcanobiological 
Studies,  and  a  not-so-
friendly rivalry with the 
Talespinners  League. 
However, members give 
the cold shoulder to wiz
-
ards “who just want to 
copy our books for the 
spells,  not  because 
they  want  to 
learn
 
anything.”
  Joining  the  Col
-
lege  of  Concrescent 
Lore: 
Candidates  for 
membership must pass 
a series of examinations 
to gain admission. Each test is unique, com
-
posed  of  questions  posed  by  collegians  with 
specialties similar to the one the candidate has 
requested. Because those who contribute to the test 
tend to be widely scattered, it can take months for the 
college to prepare an exam and even longer for the 
contributors to grade it. Those who contributed test ques
-
tions have the sole authority to admit the candidate, and 
particularly petty collegians have been known to create 
unthinkably difficult questions just to keep new blood 
out of their favorite disciplines.
  Passing a typical examination requires the following 
successful skill checks: DC 25 Knowledge (arcana), DC 
College of 
Concrescent Lore 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


166
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
167
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
25 Knowledge (history), and either DC 15 Knowledge 
(architecture  and  engineering)  or  DC  15  Knowledge 
(geography). In addition, the candidate must be able to 
read and write at least one obscure language. Depending 
on the desired specialty, the DCs may be higher or lower. 
Retries  are  allowed,  but  only  to  apply  for  a  different 
specialty.
  The initial membership fee is 500 gp, which goes to 
pay for the creation and grading of the test. Annual dues 
are 250 gp; active collegians spend much more than this 
on their research, correspondence with other members, 
and occasional regional meetings.
  Character Benefits: 
The greatest advantage to mem
-
bership in this college is access to the volumes of research 
its members produce each year. Unless they’ve somehow 
made  enemies  among  their  colleagues,  members  can 
count on receiving advance word of every discovery made 
in their fields.
  Members with specific questions also have the right to 
query members outside their own specialties for informa
-
tion. Answering such a query is rarely a high priority, 
however, especially if no reason is given for the request.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Members of the college 
tend to be intelligent, focused on their academic pursuits, 
and  strangely  secretive.  They  prefer  to  ask  questions 
rather than provide answers. Some nonmembers find this 
off-putting. Few resent the pursuit of knowledge, but the 
college’s secretive nature sometimes angers those who 
enjoy a more free-flowing exchange of information. In 
particular, members of the Talespinners League resent 
the collegians.
  Typical Member: 
Most of the college’s members are 
mid-level  bards,  wizards,  and  experts  with  maximum 
ranks in several Knowledge skills. Each member chooses 
an area of knowledge (such as “The Second Empire of 
Qirtaia” or “Vordhavian Death Magic”) as a specialty upon 
entering the college, but this choice can be changed as 
often as once a year. The administrators update the list of 
members and specialties annually and circulate that docu
-
ment, called a “yearbook,” to the current membership.
  Prestige Classes: 
Wizards and clerics who become 
members of the college typically aspire to take levels in 
the loremaster prestige class. Bards occasionally pursue 
the  loremaster  class,  but  more  aspire  to  the  virtuoso 
prestige class, hoping to continue the development of 
their musical abilities while focusing on their knowledge 
and magical talents.
  Lore of the Guild: 
The college focuses on acquiring 
knowledge  developed  by  others  rather  than  perform
-
ing  specific  deeds  or  accomplishing  heroic  missions. 
Although a few of the organization’s younger members 
remain  active  adventurers  in  order  to  seek  out  and 
recover  lost  tomes,  scrolls,  and  other  repositories  of 
knowledge, the bulk of the guild’s membership spends 
most of its time in quiet study. Nonetheless, the famous 
split between the Talespinners League and the college is 
occasionally the subject of debate in all levels of society, 
especially by those concerned with the distribution of 
magical knowledge or ancient relics.
  A  College  of  Concrescent  Lore  Campaign: 
A 
campaign centering on the acquisition of hidden and 
magical lore offers great potential for parties of any level 
and class composition, especially if the party must deal 
with internal and external conflicts around whether or 
not to share that knowledge. In most cases, a campaign 
that includes the college should also include the rivalry 
between the college and the Talespinners League. These 
two organizations might even be represented in the same 
party,  with  the  members  of  the  college  struggling  to 
safeguard any lore the party finds and the talespinners 
pushing the group to share the knowledge with any who 
express an interest.
Sample Concrescent Lorist
 
Pyrus:
 Male elf diviner 5; CR 5; Medium humanoid; 
HD 5d4; hp 14; Init +1; Spd 30 ft.; AC 11, touch 11, flat-
footed 10; Base Atk +2; Grp +1; Atk or Full Atk +1 melee 
(1d6–1, quarterstaff); SA spells; SQ elf traits, familiar 
(cat), familiar benefits, low-light vision; AL N; SV Fort 
+1, Ref +2, Will +6 (+8 against enchantments); Str 8, Dex 
12, Con 10, Int 16, Wis 14, Cha 13.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Decipher Script +10, Knowledge (arcana) 
+11, Knowledge (geography) +8, Knowledge (history) +11, 
Knowledge (the planes) +11, Listen +6, Move Silently 
+4, Search +5, Spellcraft +13, Spot +6; Alertness, Craft 
Wondrous Item
B
, Open Minded† (2), Scribe Scroll
B
.
  † New feat described on page 111
.
  Languages:
 Common, Elven; Draconic, Giant, Sylvan.
 
Familiar:
 Pyrus’s familiar is a cat named Quill. The 
familiar uses the better of its own and Pyrus’s base save 
bonuses. The creature’s abilities and characteristics are 
summarized below.
 
Familiar Benefits:
 Pyrus gains special benefits from 
having a familiar. This creature grants Pyrus a +3 bonus 
on Move Silently checks (included in the above statistics). 
Pyrus and Quill enjoy the empathic link and share spells 
special qualities.
 
Alertness (Ex):
 Quill grants its master Alertness as long 
as it is within 5 feet.
 
Empathic Link (Su):
 Pyrus can communicate telepathi
-
cally with his familiar at a distance of up to 1 mile. The 
master has the same connection to an item or a place that 
the familiar does.
 
Share Spells (Su):
 Pyrus can have any spell he casts on 
himself also affect his familiar if the latter is within 5 
feet at the time. He can also cast a spell with a target of 
“You” on his familiar.
 
Diviner
 
Spells  Prepared
  (caster  level  5th;  prohibited 
school  evocation):  0—
arcane  mark,  detect  magic,  detect 
poison, mage hand, read magic;
 1st—
alarm, color spray
 
(DC  14),
  comprehend  languages,  identify, 
unseen  servant;
  2nd—
detect  thoughts,  fox’s 
cunning,  glitterdust
  (DC  15),
  locate  object;
 
3rd—
arcane sight, deep slumber 
(DC 
16)
, tongues.
 
 
Spellbook:
 as above plus 0—all 
except evocation; 1st—
erase, mage 
armor,  mount,  obscuring 
mist;
  2nd—
arcane  lock, 
mirror  image;
  3rd—
dispel 
magic, gaseous form.
 
Possessions:  ring  of  protection 
+1,
 quarterstaff, arcane scroll 
of 
greater magic weapon
, arcane 
scroll  of 
dispel  magic
,  spellbook, 
spell component pouch, 4 pearls 
(100 gp each), 60 pp.
  Quill, Cat Familiar: 
CR —; Tiny animal; HD 6; 
hp 23; Init +2; Spd 30 ft.; AC 17, touch 14, flat-footed 
15; Base Atk +5; Grp –7; Atk +9 melee (1d2–4, claw) Full 
Atk +9 melee (1d2–4, 2 claws); SA deliver touch spells; 
SQ improved evasion, low-light vision, scent, speak with 
master; AL NG; SV Fort +3, Ref +5, Will +9; Str 3, Dex 
15, Con 10, Int 8; Wis 12, Cha 7.
 
Skills  and  Feats: 
Balance  +10,  Climb  +6,  Hide  +16*, 
Jump +10, Listen +3, Move Silently +8, Spot +6; Stealthy, 
Weapon Finesse
B
.
 
Deliver  Touch  Spells  (Su):
  Quill  can  deliver  touch 
spells for Pyrus (see Familiars, page 52 of the 
Player’s 
Handbook).
 
Improved Evasion (Ex):
 If Quill is exposed to any effect 
that normally allows it to attempt a Reflex saving throw 
for half damage, it takes no damage with a successful 
saving  throw  and  half  damage  if  the  saving  throw 
fails.
 
Speak with Master (Ex):
 Quill can communicate verbally 
with Pyrus. Other creatures do not understand the com
-
munication without magical help.
 
Skills:
 Cats have a +4 racial bonus on Climb, Hide, and 
Move Silently checks and a +8 racial bonus on Jump 
checks. Cats have a +8 racial bonus on Balance checks. 
They  use  their  Dexterity  modifier  instead  of  their 
Strength modifier for Climb and Jump checks. *In areas 
of tall grass or heavy undergrowth, the Hide bonus rises 
to +8.
DAGGERSPELL GUARDIANS
Exotic  spellcasters  who  wield  matched  pairs  of 
daggers  and  deadly  magical  pow
-
ers, the Daggerspell Guardians use 
their  varied  abilities  to  promote 
their own fair-minded sense of 
justice.  Individual  members 
lead  adventuring  parties, 
root  out  evil  hiding  in 
civilized communities, and 
act  as  self-appointed  in
-
vestigators  and  law 
enforcers  when  nec
-
essary.  Groups  rarely 
act together and instead con
-
centrate on training new 
members,  researching 
new spells, or perfecting 
new aspects of their unusual 
fighting style.
   One of the most interesting aspects 
of the Daggerspell Guardians is their 
emphasis on both martial and magical 
power. Although they still focus on spellcasting as their 
primary means of dealing with foes, they all wield their 
twin daggers with surprising skill. Some use their spells 
to enhance their physical abilities and then enter melee, 
casting amid a whirlwind of flashing knives. Others use 
their spells to bring down foes and reveal their deadly sets 
of knives only when an enemy seeks to target a spellcaster 
who might look physically weak.
  Two spellcasting prestige classes are associated with 
the guild. The daggerspell shapers (see page 
36 ) appeal to 
druids and other divine spellcasters, and the daggerspell 
mages (see page 
31 ) appeal to wizards and other arcane 
spellcasters. These two groups within the organization 
are separate only in the type of spells they cast and the 
Daggerspell 
Guardians 
 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


168
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
169
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
training they undergo. In all other aspects, the two hold 
equal sway and numbers within the organization.
  Joining  the  Daggerspell  Guardians: 
The  Dag
-
gerspell  Guardians  have  never  been  large  in  number, 
and although they always look for new members, they 
take only a small percentage of those who wish to join. 
Although candidates need not be of a high enough level 
to join one of the daggerspell prestige classes, they usually 
need some spellcasting ability, a Dexterity score high 
enough to eventually train in using two weapons at once, 
and most important, a sincere and compassionate drive 
to do good. Those hoping to join the guild must find a 
sponsor—usually an existing member of the guild, but 
other  noted  good-aligned  adventurers  or  community 
leaders occasionally sponsor members as well—and peti
-
tion the guild leadership for membership. The leadership 
usually sends a representative to talk with the candidate 
and measure her abilities. Once accepted, a candidate 
usually receives training from another member of the 
Daggerspell Guardians.
  Character Benefits: 
Characters who belong to the 
Daggerspell Guardians find that opinions vary greatly 
about their activities and the organization to which they 
belong. In many places, a member receives a small (typi
-
cally 5%) discount on mundane services such as lodging 
and food, as long as she makes it known that she belongs 
to the guild. On the other hand, some local rulers don’t 
enjoy the idea of a group of powerful warrior-spellcasters 
roaming  through  the  realm  and  following  their  own 
moral code, however noble their purpose. These rulers, 
and those who serve them, have been known to turn a 
cold shoulder to a Guardian’s requests and to devise other 
subtle means of encouraging her to continue her travels 
in another realm.
  Many communities welcome the arrival of a Guardian, 
but they are also likely to approach her with requests for 
assistance. Whether the area is beset by a powerful bug
-
bear tribe or one farmer claims that another has infringed 
on his fields, a guardian is someone outside the immediate 
community who can provide help and judgment.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Most Daggerspell Guard
-
ians are calm and reserved. While they are confident in 
their ability to decide between right and wrong, they hold 
their judgment, in part to gauge the reactions of others 
and to better learn about their adventuring companions. 
They also do it to ensure that they make a correct assess
-
ment of the situation. In most roleplaying situations, a 
member should ask more questions than she answers and 
keep her opinions to herself until asked. Another good 
approach to roleplaying a Guardian is to emphasize her 
caution when dealing with other people without letting 
this devolve into outright suspicion.
  Typical  Member: 
The  typical  Daggerspell  Guard
-
ian  is  a  low-level  druid  or  wizard  who  has  made  the 
unorthodox choice of learning to fight with two weap
-
ons—specifically, two daggers. After she has finished 
her  apprenticeship,  a  member  often  joins  a  group  of 
adventurers.  The  guild  encourages  members  to  fight 
against evil actively, discover lost treasures or wells of 
power, and work diligently to oppose monstrous creatures 
that  threaten  civilized  areas.  When  not  adventuring, 
a typical member lives off the proceeds of past adven
-
tures, although a few find work in law enforcement or 
as special investigators in communities where crime is 
a problem. Because they are so focused on spellcasting, 
Guardians often spend time with other guild members, 
learning more advanced spells or practicing their fighting 
techniques.
  Prestige Classes: 
Most members of the Daggerspell 
Guardians aspire to become either daggerspell shapers 
or daggerspell mages, depending on whether they have 
an affinity for divine or arcane magic. Members of the 
daggerspell prestige classes are afforded special respect 
in  the  guild,  and  even  those  with  little  spellcasting 
ability see themselves on the path to entering one of the 
prestige classes. The highest-ranking members have levels 
in one of the two daggerspell classes, but powerful and 
influential members of other classes have forged lasting 
alliances with the Guardians without taking levels in 
either prestige class or formally becoming members of 
the organization. 
  Lore of the Guild: 
Many of the greatest treasures of 
the Daggerspell Guardians are, not surprisingly, pairs 
of matched magic daggers of great power. Two of the 
most treasured of these daggersw, the 
emerald knives of 
seven truths
, were lost years ago by a daggerspell shaper 
who  fell  in  battle  against  a  powerful  vampire  named 
Malkan Ry-Ul. Both the knives and the vampire have 
been missing for many years, but recently travelers from 
the east have reported that a great city there is haunted 
by a killer who leaves strange green cuts on the bodies of 
his victims—a signature side effect of the magic of the 
emerald knives.
  A Daggerspell Campaign: 
A campaign centering on 
the Daggerspell Guardians need include only one or two 
PCs who belong to the guild. Members often adventure 
with  nonmembers,  and  the  group’s  activities  provide 
an  excellent  set  of  hooks  for  good  characters  of  any 
class. Because the guild believes in very lofty and open 
versions of good and justice, a campaign focused on the 
Daggerspell Guardians should include adventures that 
deal with subtle moral problems and emphasize that the 
characters form their own definition of the word “good.” 
A mix of dungeon adventuring and political intrigue is 
the perfect blend for a group affiliated with the guild.
Sample Daggerspell Guardian
 
Seraphina Thorngage:
 Female halfling druid 3; CR 
3; Small humanoid; HD 3d8; hp 17; Init +3; Spd 20 ft.; AC 
17, touch 14, flat-footed 14; Base Atk +2; Grp –2; Atk +6 
melee (1d3, masterwork dagger); Full Atk +4 melee (1d3, 
2 masterwork daggers); SA spells; SQ animal companion 
(eagle), animal companion benefits, trackless step, wild 
empathy +4 (+0 magical beasts), woodland stride; AL NG; 
SV Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +6 (+8 against fear); Str 10, Dex 
16, Con 10, Int 8, Wis 15, Cha 13.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Climb +2, Concentration +6, Handle 
Animal +6, Hide +6, Jump –2, Knowledge (nature) +2, 
Listen +4, Move Silently +5, Survival +4; Two-Weapon 
Fighting, Weapon Finesse.
  Languages:
 Common, Druidic, Halfling.
  Animal Companion (Ex):
  Seraphina  has  an  eagle 
named  Keeneye  as  an  animal  companion.  Keeneye’s 
abilities and characteristics are summarized below. 
 
Animal Companion Benefits: 
Seraphina and Keen
-
eye enjoy the link and share spells special qualities.
 
Link  (Ex):
  Seraphina  can  handle  Keeneye  as  a  free 
action. She also gains a +4 circumstance bonus on all 
wild empathy checks and Handle Animal checks made 
regarding her eagle.
 
Share Spells (Ex):
 Seraphina can have any spell she casts 
on herself also affect her animal companion if the latter 
is within 5 feet at the time. She can also cast a spell with 
a target of “You” on her animal companion.
  Trackless  Step  (Ex):
  Seraphina  leaves  no  trail  in 
natural surroundings and cannot be tracked.
  Woodland Stride (Ex):
 Seraphina can move through 
natural thorns, briars, overgrown areas, and similar ter
-
rain at her normal speed and without damage or other 
impairment.  However,  thorns,  briars,  and  overgrown 
areas that are magically manipulated to impede motion 
still affect her.
 
Druid Spells Prepared
 (caster level 3rd): 0—
create water, 
detect  magic,  light,  purify  food  and  drink;
  1st—
cure  light 
wounds, longstrider, magic fang;
 2nd—
cat’s grace, daggerspell 
stance
†
.
  † New spell described on page 145
.
 
Possessions: +1 leather armor,
 two masterwork daggers, 2 
potions of cure moderate wounds
, spell component pouch, 
75 gp.
 
Keeneye, Eagle Companion:
 CR —; Small animal; 
HD 3d8+3; hp 16; Init +3; Spd 10 ft., fly 80 ft. (average); 
AC 17, touch 14, flat-footed 14; Base Atk +2; Grp –2; Atk 
+7 melee (1d4, talon); Full Atk +7 melee (1d4, 2 talons) and 
+1 melee (1d4, bite); SA —; SQ bonus tricks (2), evasion, 
low-light vision; AL N; SV Fort +4, Ref +6, Will +3; Str 
11, Dex 16, Con 12, Int 2, Wis 14, Cha 6.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Listen +2, Spot +16; Weapon Finesse, 
Weapon Focus (talons).
 
Evasion (Ex):
 If Keeneye is exposed to any effect that 
normally allows it to attempt a Reflex saving throw for 
half damage, it takes no damage with a successful saving 
throw.
 
Tricks:
 Keeneye knows the following tricks (including 
his bonus tricks): assist attack†, assist defend†, attack, 
defend, down, heel, hunt†, seek.
  † New tricks described on page 100
.
DRAGONBLADE NINJA CLAN
Long ago, a powerful family suffered a great betrayal at 
the hands of an ambitious prince. After the treachery, 
few of the family members or their most trusted retainers 
were left standing, and those who were still alive faced 
a hard choice: sacrifice their honor by fleeing, or perish 
against the overwhelming forces of their united enemies. 
While the bulk of the family stood and fought, a few of 
the remaining warriors were entrusted with escorting 
some of the family’s youngest members to a secret estate 
far to the north.
  This ancient holding was kept hidden from all but a 
few of the family’s highest-ranking members because it 
concealed a secret greater than even the family’s honor. 
A dying silver dragon of great power had charged the 
family with guarding its last clutch of eggs, but due to a 
terrible curse put upon them by a rival dragon, the eggs 
took  centuries  to  hatch.  When  the  remaining  family 
members arrived at the estate, they realized that they 
could not fail such a trust despite the setbacks they had 
encountered, and so they resigned themselves to fading 
into obscurity rather than appealing to other rivals of 
the traitorous prince for aid.
  Because the premier warriors of the family had fallen in 
the betrayal, the clan was left without martial teachings 
of its own. After a few quiet centuries, the family name 
had been forgotten by all but a few jaded historians who 


170
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
171
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
toiled deep in the vast imperial libraries. Eventually the 
silver dragon’s eggs hatched, and as the dragons matured 
they learned of their great debt to the family. The young 
dragons  left,  and  many  human  generations  passed 
before one returned with a gift. Now grown to great 
power, the dragon Silverwing offered knowledge of 
the fighting techniques of a long-lost group of warriors 
who had mastered subtle skills.
  After long periods of training under Silverwing’s 
tutelage, the new family warriors began to exact 
their  vengeance  for  crimes  long  forgotten  by 
the rest of the empire. They earned the name 
dragonblade ninjas from those few bystanders 
who saw them fight and lived to speak of it 
afterward. Within a few years, every last 
descendant of the traitorous prince had 
been killed, and the family’s vengeance 
was complete.
  His  debt  repaid,  Silverwing  left 
the family to make his own choices 
about  his  role  in  the  world.  Gen
-
erations  later,  the  family  still  remains 
in  hiding,  although  it  now  recruits  a 
few trusted individuals into its ranks every few 
years.  Without  the  dragon’s  guidance 
or the burning quest of vengeance to 
drive it, however, the family’s will has 
fragmented,  and  its  warriors  pursue 
diverse and sometimes conflicting goals. 
Some  wish  to  reveal  themselves  and 
claim their right as a prominent family. 
Others wish to remain in hiding and use 
their skills for profit and adventure. Still 
others take an even more sinister path, selling 
their lethal skills as assassins to anyone who can 
pay their high fees.
  Joining the Dragonblade Ninja Clan: 
The  vast  majority  of  Dragonblade  Ninja 
Clan members are born into the organiza
-
tion, but the group is not closed to outsiders. 
The clan remains very protective of its secrets and 
the identities of its most powerful leaders, but it still 
extends membership invitations to those who prove 
to be worthy allies and loyal companions. These rare 
instances of acceptance into the clan often involve 
a wandering dragonblade warrior who adventures with 
trusted companions and, after his comrades have proven 
their worth time and time again, invites them into the 
clan. Membership in the Dragonblade Ninja Clan is a 
lifelong commitment, and it is never to be undertaken 
lightly. 
  Character Benefits: 
The  Dragonblade  Ninja  Clan 
offers access to many strange items and fighting tech
-
niques  not  available  to  other  characters.  Consider 
allowing members access to a small selection of prestige 
classes and items from the 
Oriental Adventures
 sup
-
plement even if they are not normally available 
in your campaign world. This access might 
include the ninja class described in Chapter 
1 of this book, if you don’t choose to make it 
available to all characters in the campaign.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Most dragon
-
blade ninjas remain honest and honorable, 
despite  the  setbacks  that  their  clan  has 
suffered and despite the fact that their 
training favors stealth and assassina
-
tion rather than open warfare.
  Typical Member: 
Many members 
of the Dragonblade Ninja Clan have 
at least one level in ninja, although 
a fair portion are rogues, experts, 
or warriors. They spend the majority 
of  their  time  tending  to  the  quieter 
pursuits of the clan, such as guarding 
its hidden fortresses and performing basic 
acts of espionage that allow the clan to 
maintain  its  secrecy  while  remaining 
informed about the world.
  Prestige  Classes: 
The  highest-level 
members  of  the  Dragonblade  Ninja  Clan 
often take levels in the ghost-faced killer, assassin, 
or shadowdancer prestige classes. These classes repre
-
sent three very different approaches to missions, 
adventuring, and killing that members of the 
clan espouse. Those who follow the path of the 
ghost-faced killer see their abilities as a powerful 
tool to use with deliberate purpose. Those who 
pursue the path of the assassin see their skills as 
the perfect commodity to sell to the highest bidder, 
caring less about issues of morality. Those who seek 
to attain levels in the shadowdancer prestige class 
have  a  much  looser  approach  to  the  clan  and  its 
honor (although they still carefully maintain their 
oaths  of  secrecy)  and  prefer  lives  of  adventure  to 
lives of intrigue.
  Lore of the Guild: 
The founding of the Dragonblade 
Ninja Clan is the stuff of legend, but many recent deeds 
attributed to the clan are worthy of discussion. In fact, 
tales of the clan’s activities are so popular with portions 
of the common populace that bards now recount these 
tales in song and story, and every village has at least one 
local tough who intimates that he has special knowledge 
of the clan and its activities. Many of the recent tales 
involve the death of a young half-elf named Krialla and 
the disappearance of her magic sword 
Nightbloom
. Krialla, 
an adventurer who had enjoyed a few minor successes, 
apparently came upon the powerful sword in the hands 
of a gravely wounded warrior as she was returning from 
an adventure. Rather than render aid, the half-elf took 
advantage of the warrior’s wounded state and seized the 
sword for her own. Although the warrior was too weak to 
resist, he promised that within a year ghosts would come 
to claim the sword and take his revenge. With Krialla now 
dead and the weapon missing, many of the common folk 
have concluded that the warrior was a dragonblade ninja, 
and that whoever now wields 
Nightbloom
 also must be a 
member of the vaunted clan.
  A  Dragonblade  Ninja  Clan  Campaign: 
Because 
of  its  varied  and  sometimes  conflicting  interests,  the 
Dragonblade Ninja Clan offers a fascinating center for a 
campaign. Characters can attempt to guide the family’s 
interests, flee from the family to pursue their own goals 
and adventures, or even join the organization later in their 
careers and filter the tensions within the clan through 
their own experiences.
Sample Dragonblade Ninja
 
Li Fan:
 Male human ninja 3; CR 3; Medium humanoid; 
HD 3d6+3; hp 16; Init +6; Spd 30 ft.; AC 14, touch 14, 
flat-footed 12; Base Atk +2; Grp +3; Atk or Full Atk +4 
melee (1d6+2/19–20, short sword) or +4 melee (1d6/
×
3, 
masterwork shortbow); SA 
ki
 power 3/day, sudden strike 
+2d6, SQ ghost step, poison use, trapfinding; AL N; SV 
Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +3; Str 12, Dex 15, Con 13, Int 10, 
Wis 14, Cha 8.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Balance +7, Climb +5, Disable Device 
+10, Hide +8, Jump +3, Move Silently +8, Open Lock +7, 
Search +4, Spot +8, Tumble +8; Dodge, Improved Initia
-
tive, Tactile Trapsmith†.
  † New feat described on page 112
.
  Language:
 Common.
 
Ghost Step (Su):
 Li can spend one daily use of his 
ki
 
power to become invisible for 1 round. Using this abil
-
ity is a swift action (see page 
137  ) that does not provoke 
attacks of opportunity.
 
Ki Power (Su):
 Li can use his 
ki
 power three times per 
day, and only if he is wearing no armor and is unencum
-
bered. Because he is a 3rd-level ninja, his only 
ki
 power 
is ghost step.
  As long as Li’s 
ki
 pool isn’t empty (that is, as long as he 
has at least one daily use remaining), he gains a +2 bonus 
on his Will saves.
 
Poison Use (Ex):
 Li never risks accidentally poisoning 
himself when applying poison to a weapon.
 
Sudden Strike (Ex):
 Li deals an extra 2d6 points of 
damage on any successful attack against flat-footed or 
flanked targets, or against a target that has been denied 
its  Dexterity  bonus  for  any  reason.  This  damage  also 
applies to ranged attacks against targets up to 30 feet away. 
Creatures with concealment, creatures without discern
-
ible anatomies, and creatures immune to extra damage 
from critical hits are all immune to sudden strikes.
 
Trapfinding (Ex):
 Li can find, disarm, or bypass traps 
with a DC of 20 or higher. He can use the Search skill to 
find, and the Disable Device skill to disarm, magic traps 
(DC 25 + the level of the spell used to create it). If his 
Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 10 or more, 
he discovers how to bypass the trap without triggering 
or disarming it.
 
Possessions: +1 short sword,
 masterwork shortbow with 
20 arrows, masterwork thieves’ tools, 1 dose of green
-
blood oil.
EYES OF THE OVERKING
As one of the premier information-gathering and espio
-
nage groups in the world, the Eyes of the Overking are 
respected and even feared by the few who know they 
exist. Born in service to a legend, the guild devotes itself 
to preparing the world for the return of the Overking, 
a near-mythical figure who supposedly once held the 
human, elf, and dwarf people united as one nation for 
hundreds  of  years.  The  Eyes  focus  on  espionage  and 
information-gathering  because  their  teachings  hold 
that they will be responsible for helping the newly risen 
Overking see the world as it really is and for keeping him 
apprised of the most important matters while he builds 
and protects a new united realm.
  In practical terms, the Eyes of the Overking stray far 
from these roots and remain the most effective intelli
-
gence organization for several neighboring kingdoms. The 
guild holds that these kingdoms are the lost fragments of 
the Overking’s great kingdom, but that fact (if it’s true) has 
little meaning to the rulers of the realms. These rulers cau
-
tiously pay the organization for its excellent intelligence 
work and its apparently loyal stance on national issues. 
Although the kingdoms that the Eyes serve occasionally 
Dragonblade 
 
Ninja Clan 
 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


172
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
173
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
have  conflicts  between  them,  the  organization  never 
betrays confidences between one kingdom and another 
and often works to keep nations on friendly terms (the 
better to prepare for their eventual reunification).
  This approach makes the Eyes a subtle but powerful 
force for order in much of the world. They often put their 
influence and contacts to work directly against evil cults, 
kingdoms,  and  even 
powerful  evil  indi
-
viduals.  While  the 
organization  remains 
focused on peace and 
unity,  it  is  far  from 
wholly good, and its 
agents  do  not  hesitate 
to  use  blackmail,  extor
-
tion, or even assassination to 
maintain  peaceful  relations 
between  the  diverse  rulers 
that they support.
  Although  many  indi
-
vidual  members  join  and 
serve  the  organization 
for much more practical 
reasons, the core of the 
organization  remains 
focused  on  the  Over-
king’s return.
  Joining the Eyes of 
the Overking: 
The  Eyes  of 
the  Overking  constantly  work  to  build  new 
contacts, especially among fledgling adventurers. 
These contacts include those with the potential 
to join the guild, those most likely to obtain rare 
or valuable information in the future, and those 
worthy  of  notice  should  they  turn  to  crime.  The 
Eyes prefer to approach potential members through 
intermediaries first, measuring a potential recruit’s skill 
and resourcefulness while ensuring that she is likely to 
remain trustworthy. Whenever possible, they attempt 
to recruit entire adventuring groups, knowing that each 
individual in the group is more likely to remain loyal to 
the organization if she knows that her friends have also 
pledged themselves to the guild.
  Character Benefits: 
Characters who belong to the 
Eyes of the Overking have access to missions and secret 
information beyond the reach of most other characters. 
The guild works tirelessly to track criminals, spy on the 
nobility, and defend the kingdom through all manner 
of espionage acts. These activities benefit PCs associ
-
ated  with  the  guild  by  providing  endless  adventure 
opportunities, but even more important, they provide 
connections and contacts among the highest ranks of 
the kingdom’s nobility. Depending on a member’s char
-
acter level and past successes, the organization should 
be able to provide an avenue through which she can 
have  access  to  those 
in  power  within  a 
community.
  Roleplaying  Sug
-
gestions: 
The Eyes 
of  the  Overking 
maintain a  veil  of 
secrecy  even  though 
knowledge of their existence 
has generally spread through
-
out the populace. This policy 
prevents characters from re
-
vealing their affiliation with 
the  organization  in  all  but 
the  most  trying  or  im
-
portant  circumstances. 
Therefore,  membership 
has  little  direct  effect 
on  most  roleplaying 
encounters  except  to 
emphasize  the  need 
for discretion. In general, 
members are observant, effi
-
cient, and personable. One trait that 
the Eyes stress is the ability to act 
swiftly and decisively when needed. For this reason, 
members of the organization remain deceptively 
calm for long periods of time and then burst into short 
periods of activity. Once an agent decides to commit to a 
course of action, there is no holding back, and her swift
-
ness often catches opponents by surprise.
  Typical Member: 
The typical member of the Eyes of 
the Overking is a low-level rogue, bard, or scout. Because 
such individuals are often skilled in both disguise and 
melee combat, they work in subtle ways to keep the orga
-
nization’s leadership apprised of criminal and political 
events within the kingdom. They occasionally add num
-
bers to an important raid led by a higher-level member 
of the organization, and they often serve as guards in the 
organization’s safe houses and headquarters.
  Prestige Classes: 
High-level members of the Eyes of 
the Overking are spies of consummate skill, but few use 
exactly the same techniques. Most of the mid- and high-
level members are rogues or ninjas, but many have levels 
in a prestige class as well. Members prefer training as 
spymasters, shadowminds, vigilantes, and bloodhounds, 
but they also take levels in prestige classes less obviously 
associated with espionage, such as loremaster.
  Lore of the Guild: 
Although the Eyes of the Overking 
serve many good-aligned rulers well, their existence rests 
on the belief that the rightful Overking will rise again. 
Members renew a vow each year to devote their efforts to 
readying the world for the Overking’s return. Most of the 
legends of the guild’s exploits, therefore, involve daring 
acts in search of the final resting place of the Overking 
or steps to make the world ready for his return.
  An Eyes of the Overking Campaign: 
As one of the 
premier intelligence-gathering and espionage agencies in 
the world, the Eyes of the Overking offers great potential 
for use as the center of a campaign, as one aspect of a 
complex setting, or even as a major antagonist capable of 
challenging a party of any level. Campaigns in which the 
PCs are affiliated with the Eyes usually stress themes of 
nationalism and potentially deal with the return of the 
Overking himself. Campaigns that include the organiza
-
tion as a major antagonist feature foes who know more 
about  the  political  and  criminal  powers  in  the  world 
than the PCs do, and should constantly present the play
-
ers with surprising twists and plots by members of the 
organization.
  If a suitable figure does not exist in the history of your 
campaign world, the Eyes of the Overking need not be 
tied to a long-dead ruler. Simply substitute a powerful 
living figure, and change the name of the organization 
to match.
Sample Eyes of the Overking Member
 
Shauna Edwit:
 Female half-elf rogue 4; CR 4; Medium 
humanoid (elf); HD 4d6+4; hp 20; Init +3; Spd 30 ft.; AC 
16, touch 13, flat-footed 16; Base Atk +3; Grp +2; Atk or 
Full Atk +7 melee (1d6/18–20, 
+1 rapier
); SA sneak attack 
+2d6; SQ evasion, low-light vision, half-elf traits, trap 
sense +1, trapfinding, uncanny dodge; AL LN; SV Fort 
+2; Ref +7, Will +1; Str 8, Dex 16, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 10, 
Cha 14.
  Languages:
 Common, Elven; Dwarven.
 
Skills and Feats: 
Bluff +9, Diplomacy +14, Disguise +11 
(+13 acting in character), Gather Information +4, Intimi
-
date +4, Knowledge (nobility and royalty) +6, Listen +8, 
Search +2, Sense Motive +9, Sleight of Hand +12, Spot 
+1, Tumble +10; Negotiator, Weapon Finesse.
 
Sneak Attack (Ex):
 Shauna deals an extra 2d6 points 
of damage on any successful attack against flat-footed or 
flanked targets, or against a target that has been denied 
its  Dexterity  bonus  for  any  reason.  This  damage  also 
applies to ranged attacks against targets up to 30 feet 
away.  Creatures  with  concealment,  creatures  without 
discernible anatomies, and creatures immune to extra 
damage from critical hits are all immune to sneak attacks. 
Shauna can choose to deliver nonlethal damage with her 
sneak attack, but only when using a weapon designed for 
that purpose, such as a sap (blackjack).
 
Evasion (Ex):
 If Shauna is exposed to any effect that 
normally allows her to attempt a Reflex saving throw 
for half damage, she takes no damage with a successful 
saving throw.
 
Half-Elf Traits:
 Half-elves have immunity to magic 
sleep effects. For all effects related to race, a half-elf is 
considered an elf.
 
Trapfinding (Ex):
 Shauna can find, disarm, or bypass 
traps with a DC of 20 or higher. She can use the Search 
skill to find, and the Disable Device skill to disarm, magic 
traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used to create it). If 
her Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 10 
or more, she discovers how to bypass the trap without 
triggering or disarming it.
  Uncanny Dodge (Ex):
 Shauna retains her Dexterity 
bonus  to  AC  even  when  flat-footed  or  targeted  by  an 
unseen foe (she still loses her Dexterity bonus if paralyzed 
or otherwise immobile).
 
Possessions:
 Masterwork studded leather armor, 
+1 rapier,
 
2 
potions of eagle’s splendor,
 disguise kit, 80 gp.
GRAYHAUNT INVESTIGATORS
A few years ago, a group of moderately successful adven
-
turers  turned  their  skills  to  investigation  and  private 
crime-solving. After a few quick successes, they started 
receiving more investigative work than they could ever 
handle themselves, and they saw the potential to profit
-
ably expand to new communities. The group immediately 
focused its efforts on the business and organizational 
aspects of recruiting low- and mid-level adventurers with 
analytical minds and the right mix of skills.
  In the short years since its founding, the Grayhaunt 
Investigators guild has spread to five major cities span
-
ning several nations and now coordinates hundreds of 
functioning investigative teams. These teams resemble 
adventuring groups, but they emphasize careful obser
-
vation and good detective work (including the use of 
divination magic) rather than sheer combat power.
Eyes of the 
 
Overking 
 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


174
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
175
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
  The guild takes its unusual name from its willingness 
to handle murder cases and its high level of expertise in 
discovering and countering the machinations of powerful 
undead creatures.
  Joining the Grayhaunt Investigators: 
The Grayhaunt 
Investigators  accept 
applications for mem
-
bership throughout the 
year. Candidates must 
prove  their  investigative 
skills by solving a series of 
puzzles and traps prepared 
by  the  guild.  Applicants 
are allowed to participate in 
this test as a team, because 
the  guild  encourages  its 
investigators to work in 
teams at all times. Each 
team  passes  or  fails  the 
entrance test as a group, 
but in rare cases when one 
applicant  is  clearly  superior 
to the rest of the team, the 
guild has been known to 
make exceptions. Joining 
the guild costs nothing, but 
members are expected to accept at 
least two guild-endorsed investigations 
each year and pay 5% of the commissions 
earned on such investigations.
  Character  Benefits: 
Characters  who 
belong to the Grayhaunt Investigators have 
ready access to commissions and adventure 
leads, as well as the ability to quickly find 
experts on a wide range of academic topics. 
The guild maintains robust relationships with experts 
and sages in nearly every field, and guild members often 
consult these knowledgeable individuals free of the usual 
charges.  For  extreme  cases  or  long  research  projects, 
investigators must still pay their own fees, but the guild 
picks up 10% of such costs as long as the character is a 
member in good standing and has successfully completed 
at least one investigation in the last year.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Investigators employed by 
the guild must have sharp, analytical minds, and their 
speech and mannerisms reflect this. They speak in precise 
sentences, observe before they interact in most situations, 
and spend a great deal of time questioning conclusions 
that might seem certain to others.
  Typical Member: 
Most investigators have levels in 
rogue, wizard, or ranger, although the guild also allows 
members of other classes to join if they work well with 
an investigative team. Members often devote their skill 
points to improving their Search, Spot, Listen, and Sense 
Motive  skills  before 
allocating  points  to 
other skills. Rogues in 
the guild often focus 
on  improving  their 
Open Lock and Disable 
Device skills.
     Prestige  Classes: 
While no single prestige 
class is associated with the 
guild, many provide special 
abilities that aid investiga
-
tors  in  their  missions. 
Spellcasters  aspire  to 
classes that provide them 
with an excellent base of 
Knowledge skills or divina
-
tion  powers.  Some  rogues 
and rangers aim for classes 
such as the bloodhound or 
spymaster instead.
     Lore of the Guild: 
As a rela
-
tively new guild, the Grayhaunt 
Investigators boast few of the tales 
that similar-sized guilds celebrate. 
The guild has proven to be quite 
effective at its chosen missions, however, and 
stories of its expertise continue to grow.
  A  Grayhaunt  Investigator  Campaign: 
Because  the  guild  encourages  its  members 
to  work  in  teams,  the  Grayhaunt  Investigators  make 
an excellent uniting and driving force for a campaign 
that  features  a  fair  amount  of  investigation  or  puzzle 
solving.
Sample Grayhaunt Investigator
 
Diesa Ungart:
 Female dwarf rogue 5; CR 5; Medium 
humanoid; HD 5d6; hp 20; Init +2; Spd 20 ft.; AC 17, 
touch 12, flat-footed 17; Base Atk +3; Grp +3; Atk or Full 
Atk  +4  melee  (1d6  nonlethal,  masterwork  sap)  or  +4 
melee (1d3 nonlethal, masterwork whip); Space/Reach 
5 ft./5 ft. (15 ft. with whip); SA sneak attack +3d6; SQ 
darkvision 60 ft., dwarf traits, evasion, trap sense +1, 
trapfinding, uncanny dodge; AL LN; SV Fort +1* (+3 
against poison), Ref +6*, Will +3*; Str 10, Dex 14, Con 
10, Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 12.
 
Skills  and  Feats:
  Decipher  Script  +9,  Diplomacy  +3, 
Disable Device +11, Gather Information +11, Knowledge 
(local) +9, Listen +10, Open Lock +12, Search +9 (+14 to 
find secret doors, traps, and similar concealed objects), 
Sense Motive +10, Spot +10; Combat Expertise, Exotic 
Weapon Proficiency (whip).
  Languages:
 Common, Dwarven; Gnome.
 
Sneak Attack (Ex):
 Diesa deals an extra 3d6 points 
of damage on any successful attack against flat-footed or 
flanked targets, or against a target that has been denied 
its  Dexterity  bonus  for  any  reason.  This  damage  also 
applies to ranged attacks against targets up to 30 feet away. 
Creatures with concealment, creatures without discern
-
ible anatomies, and creatures immune to extra damage 
from critical hits are all immune to sneak attacks. Diesa 
can choose to deliver nonlethal damage with her sneak 
attack, but only when using a weapon designed for that 
purpose, such as a sap (blackjack).
  Dwarf Traits:
 Dwarves have stonecunning, which 
grants  them  a  +2  racial  bonus  on  Search  checks  to 
notice unusual stonework. A dwarf who merely comes 
within 10 feet of it can make a Search check as if actively 
searching.
  When standing on the ground, dwarves are exception
-
ally stable and have a +4 bonus on ability checks made 
to resist being bull rushed or tripped. They have a +1 
racial bonus on attack rolls against orcs and goblinoids. 
Dwarves have a +4 racial bonus to Armor Class against 
giants. Their race also gives them a +2 bonus on Appraise 
or Craft checks that are related to stone or metal items.
  *Dwarves  have  a  +2  racial  bonus  on  saving  throws 
against spells and spell-like effects.
 
Evasion (Ex):
 If Diesa is exposed to any effect that 
normally allows her to attempt a Reflex saving throw 
for half damage, she takes no damage with a successful 
saving throw.
 
Trapfinding (Ex):
 Diesa can find, disarm, or bypass 
traps with a DC of 20 or higher. She can use the Search 
skill to find, and the Disable Device skill to disarm, magic 
traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used to create it). If 
her Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 10 
or more, she discovers how to bypass the trap without 
triggering or disarming it.
  Uncanny Dodge (Ex):
  Diesa  retains  her  Dexterity 
bonus  to  AC  even  when  flat-footed  or  targeted  by  an 
unseen foe (she still loses her Dexterity bonus if paralyzed 
or otherwise immobile).
 
Possessions:  +1  chain  shirt,
  masterwork  whip,  master
-
work sap, 
goggles of minute seeing
, 2
 potions of cat’s grace,
 
masterwork thieves’ tools, 2 
potions of hide from animals,
 
400 gp.
LEAGUE OF BOOT AND TRAIL
Members of this unusual organization regard every road 
as a classroom and every inn as a laboratory. Devoted to 
travel for its own sake, they accumulate little lore but see 
much of the world—and worlds beyond as well. Anything 
of interest to travelers is of interest to the League of Boot 
and Trail. Although it is organized much like a college, 
the guild offers no formal academic studies; instead, its 
members are renowned guides and scouts. They know, 
for example, the last known location of a floating isle, 
the best way to cross the Midnight Desert, and which 
church now rules the province of Aramador.
 
Because its members are rarely in the same place for 
long, the League of Boot and Trail has little formal organi
-
zation and no central leadership. Nearly every city of any 
size has a league station, where members can file reports 
on their travels, conduct research for future journeys, 
and share drinks and tales of the road. A senior member 
serves as station head at each location. If a crisis affects 
the guild as a whole, as many station heads as possible 
meet somewhere and reach a solution by consensus.
  Each league member must help to run a league station 
for one month out of every year. The most senior league 
member of a given month’s working group serves as sta
-
tion head.
  Each member who stops at a league station must file a 
report describing his or her travels since the last station 
stop. The report should include hazards, weather condi
-
tions, encounters, and any other information that might 
prove useful to other travelers.
  Each of the guild’s stations bears a red boot symbol. 
This same symbol also appears as a tattoo on each league 
member’s  left  forearm.  Though  wearing  actual  red 
boots is not required, most members do put red trim 
on their boots. In addition, every member carves two 
small notches in each boot heel so as to leave distinctive 
tracks.
  Occasionally, league members band together to bring 
to justice to anyone who displays a league tattoo but isn’t 
actually a member. The league pays handsomely for such 
services out of its own coffers, but most members would 
take on such tasks even without pay to protect the league’s 
reputation.
Grayhaunt
 
 Investigators 
 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


176
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
177
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
  For the most part, the League of Boot and Trail has few 
dealings with other organizations. However, its members 
gladly swap stories with any members of the Talespinners 
League they happen to encounter. Those who make their 
living catering to travelers treat Boot and Trail members 
well in the hope that more red-booted business will come 
their way.
  Joining the League of Boot and Trail: 
To join the 
League of Boot and Trail, a prospective member must 
present a station head with three gifts, all originating 
from at least 300 miles away. One of these gifts must be a 
case of liquor worth at least 250 gp, one must be an object 
of art worth at least 300 gp, and the last must be a riding 
horse or warhorse. If the gifts meet all the requirements, 
the candidate is tattooed with the red boot and accepted 
as a member after a riotous party.
  Dues are 500 gp per year, payable at the time of the 
member’s one-month service at a station.
  Character Benefits: 
The most significant benefit of 
membership in the League of Boot and Trail is access 
to the reports of previous travelers. A league station’s 
information about travel hazards, monsters, and current 
events isn’t fully up to date, of course, but it’s highly 
reliable.
  Any member can use the accommodations at a league 
station  free  of  charge.  Many  league  stations  operate 
general stores that sell adventuring gear for 20% less than 
the going rate to those bearing the red tattoo, as well as 
horses for half price. In addition, merchants and innkeep
-
ers along important trade routes often offer discounts to 
travelers with red boot tattoos, hoping for good reviews 
on the next set of league reports.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Members of the League of 
Boot and Trail fall into two distinct social groups: solitary 
wanderers who prefer life on the road because it gives 
them the sense of anonymity they find comfortable, and 
more outgoing personalities who enjoy travel because it 
provides a wealth of new experiences and new chances 
for social interaction.
  The first group remains reserved in most conversations, 
content to learn about others by watching rather than 
through direct interaction. These members aren’t recluses 
and are not deficient in social skills—they simply prefer 
life on the road over the deeper roots that come with 
settling in one place. The one month per year that they 
must work at a league station and the sense of belonging 
that the league provides are often the only sense of home 
and family that these individuals need.
  Most members of the league are much more outgoing, 
using their many travels to meet interesting individuals, 
exchange stories with new friends, and learn of distant 
places from other experienced travelers. These individu
-
als often start conversations with complete strangers, and 
their broad range of personal experience makes them 
excellent diplomats.
  Typical Member: 
Most members of the League of Boot 
and Trail are low-level bards, although a fair number of 
scouts and rangers also become members. The rest of the 
membership is made up of small numbers of each of the 
other PC and NPC classes. Most members prefer to spend 
much of the spring and summer traveling, although those 
required to serve at league stations during these prime 
traveling months do so willingly.
  Prestige Classes: 
Many of the league’s members do not 
prefer a specific prestige class, instead viewing their love 
for travel and their involvement in the league as some
-
thing separate from the development of their combat, 
magical, or professional skills. The most common prestige 
class among league members is the horizon walker (see 
page 189 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
). Members who 
develop an affinity for mounted travel sometimes pursue 
the wild plains outrider prestige class (see page 92
).
  Lore of the Guild: 
Although the league is more inter
-
ested in collecting tales of its members’ recent travels than 
in unearthing lost lore or discovering magical treasure, 
plenty of legends tell of the exploits of league members. 
One of the most controversial claims is that Fharlanghn, 
the deity of travel, was a league member when he was 
still a mortal. But most members, including almost 
every  follower  of  Fharlanghn,  claim  that  the 
league was actually founded by a well-disguised 
avatar of Fharlanghn.
  A League of Boot and Trail Campaign: 
Travel 
is  an  exciting  challenge  that  many  adventurers 
enjoy, and the League of Boot and Trail makes an 
excellent element of any campaign that features a great 
deal of overland travel. Even in campaigns with more 
modest amounts of travel, the league’s open policies 
and ingrained desire to reach new places can provide 
an excellent rationale for introducing exotic character 
options such as monstrous characters, cultural pres
-
tige classes that originated in distant lands, and even 
new standard classes such as the ninja or the samurai.
Sample League of Boot and Trail Member
 
Skirna Longwalker:
 Female gnome scout 4; CR 4; 
Small humanoid; HD 4d8; hp 21; Init +3; Spd 30 ft.; AC 
19, touch 14, flat-footed 19; Base Atk +3; Grp +0; Atk 
or Full Atk +5 melee (1d4+1, masterwork short sword) 
or +7 ranged (1d4+1, composite shortbow); SA skirmish 
+1d6/+1 AC, spell-like abilities; SQ battle fortitude +1, 
gnome traits, low-light vision, trackless step, trapfinding, 
uncanny dodge; AL CG; SV Fort +2*, Ref +7*, Will +2*; 
Str 12, Dex 16, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 13.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Climb +8, Diplomacy +3, Escape Artist 
+10, Gather Information +7, Hide +14, Knowledge (geogra
-
phy) +4, Knowledge (nature) +6, Listen +10, Sense Motive 
+8, Survival +8, Use Rope +3 (+5 involving bindings); 
Dodge, Mobility
B
, Skill Focus (Gather Information).
  Languages:
 Common, Gnome.
 
Skirmish (Ex):
 Skirna gains a +1 competence bonus 
to AC and deals an extra 1d6 points of damage on all 
attacks during any round in which she moves at least 
10 feet. The extra damage applies only to attacks taken 
during  her  turn.  This  damage  also  applies  to  ranged 
attacks against targets up to 30 feet away. Creatures with 
concealment, creatures without discernible anatomies, 
and creatures immune to extra damage from critical 
hits are all immune to additional extra damage. Skirna 
loses this ability when wearing medium or heavy armor 
or when carrying a medium or heavy load.
 
Gnome Traits:
  Gnomes  have  a  +1  racial  bonus  on 
attack rolls against kobolds and goblinoids. Gnomes have 
a +4 racial bonus to Armor Class against giants.
  *Gnomes  have  a  +2  racial  bonus  on  saving  throws 
against illusions.
  Spell-Like  Abilities:
  1/day—
dancing  lights, 
ghost  sound
  (DC  11)
,  prestidigitation,  speak  with 
animals 
(burrowing  mammal  only,  duration 
1 minute).
 
Trackless Step (Ex):
 Skirna leaves no trail in 
natural surroundings and cannot be tracked.
 
Trapfinding  (Ex):
  Skirna  can  find,  disarm, 
or bypass traps with a DC of 20 or higher. She 
can use the Search skill to find, and the Disable 
Device skill to disarm, magic traps (DC 25 + 
the level of the spell used to create it). If her 
Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 
10 or more, she discovers how to bypass the trap 
without triggering or disarming it.
 
Uncanny Dodge (Ex):
 Skirna retains her Dex
-
terity bonus to AC even when flat-footed or targeted 
by an unseen foe (she still loses her Dexterity bonus 
if paralyzed or otherwise immobile).
 
Possessions:  +1  mithral  shirt,
  masterwork  short 
sword, composite shortbow (+1 Str bonus) with 20 
masterwork arrows, 2 
potions of cat’s grace.
NIGHTSONG GUILD
The Nightsong Guild has worked within the city 
for as long as most people can remember—and 
probably a good deal longer. Its members deal in 
matters not entirely legal as well as those quite 
clearly illegal—gambling, smuggling, blackmail, 
and theft. The guild’s reputation is one of extreme 
skill and competence. It is not feared as much as 
it is afforded the respect that it has earned. Most 
would refer to the Nightsong Guild as a thieves 
guild, but it is actually a far more extensive group 
than that. Its membership includes rogues, fighters, 
bards, wizards, and sorcerers.
   Guild  members  do  not  take  part  in  violent 
activities such as extortion or murder, for the guild 
leadership has long maintained that if you kill or 
intimidate your clientele, those people cease to 
make money (and if they don’t have money, the 
guild can’t make money). Of course, if one or 
more of its members are attacked or threatened 
with violence, the guild is quite clearly capable of dealing 
with the situation.
League of 
 
Boot and Trail 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
ADVENTURERS AND THE LEAGUE
The League of Boot and Trail counts many adventurers among 
its members. Some of the world’s most legendary adventurers 
recruit for their expeditions by posting offers of employment on 
the  walls  of  league  station  common  rooms.  After  all,  anyone 
heading beyond the edge of the world should have some sea
-
soned travelers along. A typical league station might have the 
following postings.
•   Travel with Karil Minick to the mirrored ice caves of Suskana. 
Hiring  experienced  guards,  scouts,  healers,  and  arcanists. 
Pays 10 gp/day plus a share of treasure gained, after expenses. 
Assemble here at summer’s end.
•   MISSING:  Ahn  of  Azath,  somewhere  along  NW  portion  of 
Griever’s Trail. 5,000 gp reward.
•   Are  you  brave  enough  to  enter  the  Valley  of  Mostarek?  I, 
Duncan  Sameth,  offer  only  your  fair  share  of  glory—the 
chance that your name will appear in the epics sung by min
-
strels yet unborn. Meet me here on the 13th of Flocktime.
•   AUCTION:  The  survivors  of  Vinto  Uredsky’s  expedition  to 
Yezelri have returned. Their treasures from this wondrous land 
will be auctioned here on 18 Flocktime, along with surplus 
expedition gear. Lots can be viewed at dawn, with bidding to 
begin at noon.
•   Royal-commissioned  explorer  seeks  guides  and  guards  for 
one-month  exploration  to  undisclosed  location.  Top  wages 
guaranteed.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs


178
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
179
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
  Joining  the  Nightsong  Guild: 
Slow  to  add  new 
members,  the  Nightsong  Guild  prefers  to  work  with 
those  it  considers  potential  recruits  for  several  years 
before actually inviting them to join. Candidates serve 
as paid informants, freelance burglars, or muscle for hire 
for long periods of time while their competence 
and trustworthiness are judged. Although most of 
these recruits are never told explicitly that they’re 
working for the Nightsong Guild, the group is pow
-
erful and notorious enough that most individuals 
guess correctly where their money 
comes from.
  Members are required to con
-
tribute  10%  of  their  earnings 
to the guild. In return, they have 
access to extensive resources (see 
below).
  Character  Benefits: 
Within  the 
confines of its home city, the Night
-
song Guild can offer its members 
nearly  impenetrable  security, 
well-funded political connections, 
and access to well-trained and loyal 
hirelings  or  followers.  Members  also 
have  access  to  the  guild’s  extensive 
library, training facilities, and workshops. 
Many places of business in the city offer 10% 
discounts on services, goods, and equipment to 
Nightsong Guild members.
  These resources can be incredibly useful, 
but they come with a price. As an efficient 
and long-lived criminal organization, the 
Nightsong  Guild  finds  a  profit  in  every 
activity  that  it  undertakes.  If  the  guild 
provides a PC with access to a local baron and 
guarantees  that  the  baron  listens  to  her 
request, the guild requires in turn that the 
character  undertake  a  dangerous  mission 
to  further  cement  that  baron’s  willingness 
to obey the wishes of the guild.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Highly trained and 
supremely confident, members of the Nightsong 
Guild remain calm and professional even in the 
most intense circumstances. They work best in 
unified teams, and they make a habit of knowing 
their  companions’  strengths  and  weaknesses.  They 
expect quick and competent action from their allies, 
especially in combat or on a dangerous mission. This 
combination of expertise and trust makes most members 
reserved and stable individuals, and they rarely waste 
words on trivial matters or debate. When a guild team 
or adventuring group makes a decision, the member is 
likely to keep her opinion in reserve until she has heard 
arguments from several other members, speak up once, 
and then quickly act on whatever decision is reached by 
the leader or by consensus.
  Typical Member: 
Most members of the Night
-
song Guild are low-level rogues, experts, fighters, or 
warriors. The rogues and experts serve 
as the eyes and ears of the organiza
-
tion,  and  the  best  and  most  loyal 
eventually advance to become mem
-
bers of either the nightsong infiltrator 
or nightsong enforcer prestige class.
  Prestige Classes: 
The Nightsong Guild 
includes  members  with  levels  in  an 
eclectic  collection  of  prestige 
classes,  but  most  belong  to  the 
nightsong  infiltrator  or  night
-
song enforcer classes. These two 
prestige  classes  epitomize  the 
organization  of  the  guild  itself. 
Two-thirds of the group, led by 
the nightsong infiltrators, spy 
on  the  rich  and  noble,  ferret 
out secrets for use in blackmail, 
perform  daring  acts  of  burglary, 
and attempt to divert the efforts of law 
enforcement. The remaining one-third of 
the guild’s membership, led by the nightsong 
enforcers, provides the group with the muscle 
that it needs to protect itself.
  Lore  of  the  Guild: 
Lenias  D’Brule, 
noblewoman,  adventurer,  and  one  of 
the  few  powerful  members  of  the 
Nightsong Guild who is open about her 
guild membership, has recently disappeared. 
The guild would like this problem to go away 
permanently. Either Lenias must be found 
and convinced to tone down her high-pro
-
file lifestyle, or the guild must be certain 
that she will never surface again. Because 
the guild is busy with its own interests in the 
city, a few representatives are quietly approaching 
established adventuring groups to find the noblewoman, 
deal with those who caused her disappearance, and then 
confront Lenias herself.
  A Nightsong Guild Campaign: 
Although excep
-
tions exist, the Nightsong Guild shouldn’t become a 
major feature in a campaign until the player characters 
reach  at  least  3rd  or  4th  level.  That’s  because  until 
they’ve completed a few adventures or missions, they’re 
not likely to attract the attention of the guild. Once 
they’ve achieved at least a small amount of success, an 
adventuring party could find the Nightsong Guild to 
be an intriguing and powerful patron—or a dangerous 
and resourceful enemy.
Sample Nightsong Guild Member
 
Alyson  Adair:
  Female  halfling 
rogue 1/fighter 2; CR 3; Small human
-
oid; HD 1d6+1 plus 2d10+1; hp 19; Init 
+7; Spd 20 ft.; AC 18, touch 14, flat-footed 
15; Base Atk +2; Grp –1; Atk or Full Atk +7 
melee (1d4+1/18–20, masterwork rapier) or 
+7 ranged (1d8/19–20, masterwork heavy 
crossbow); SA sneak attack +1d6; SQ trap
-
finding; AL NE; SV Fort +4, Ref +5, Will 
+3 (+5 against fear); Str 12, Dex 17, Con 
12, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 8.
 
Skills  and  Feats:
  Balance  +7,  Climb 
+9, Hide +11, Intimidate +5, Jump +2, 
Listen +9, Move Silently +9, Spot +3, 
Tumble +7; Alertness, Improved Initia
-
tive
B
, Iron Will, Weapon Finesse
B
.
  Languages:
 Common, Halfling.
 
Sneak  Attack  (Ex):
  Alyson  deals  an 
extra 1d6 points of damage on any successful 
attack against flat-footed or flanked targets, 
or  against  a  target  that  has  been  denied  its 
Dexterity bonus for any reason. This damage also 
applies to ranged attacks against targets up to 30 
feet away. Creatures with concealment, creatures 
without  discernible  anatomies,  and  creatures 
immune to extra damage from critical hits are 
all immune to sneak attacks. Alyson can choose 
to deliver nonlethal damage with her sneak attack, but 
only when using a weapon designed for that purpose, 
such as a sap (blackjack).
 
Trapfinding (Ex):
 Alyson can find, disarm, or bypass 
traps with a DC of 20 or higher. She can use the Search 
skill to find, and the Disable Device skill to disarm, magic 
traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used to create it). If 
her Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 10 
or more, she discovers how to bypass the trap without 
triggering or disarming it.
 
Possessions:
 Mithral shirt, masterwork rapier, master
-
work heavy crossbow with 20 bolts, 2 
potions of cure light 
wounds,
 30 gp.
ORDER OF ILLUMINATION
Evil  might  lie  behind  any  door,  and  shadow  might 
hide in any heart. The Order of Illumination holds this 
maxim close as it seeks out and destroys evil wherever 
necessary.
   The organization has two main branches, each 
dedicated to fulfilling one of the order’s 
two functions. The first is to ferret 
out evil wherever it hides, and it is 
the shadowbane stalkers who devote 
themselves to finding hidden evils and 
piercing the lies of evildoers. The second 
task is to confront these evils directly, and 
it is the shadowbane inquisitors who pick 
up sword and shield and take the fight to 
evil creatures.
   Although many of its members adven
-
ture with their comrades (especially in 
partnerships  between  a  stalker  and 
an inquisitor) and with independent 
adventuring  groups,  the  Order  of 
Illumination is not an adventuring-
oriented  organization.  The  order  is 
far more concerned with finding and 
combating  the  evils  that  hide  within 
civilized  communities  than  it  is  with 
finding lost tombs or raiding the lairs of 
dragons. The comrades are quick to praise 
such activity when it clearly serves the cause 
of good, but members are encouraged to look for 
evil closer to home whenever possible.
  Joining the Order of Illumination: 
Becom
-
ing a member of the Order of Illumination is no 
easy task. A prospective member must prove his or 
her dedication, purity, and desire to fight evil by 
fasting for three days. During this trial period, paladins 
and clerics belonging to the order visit the candidate to 
pose difficult moral questions, engage in mock combat 
trials,  and  repeatedly  subject  the  candidate  to 
detect 
evil, detect chaos,
 and 
discern lies
 spells. Membership also 
requires an offering of 100 gp.
  A potential member need not meet any specific class 
or level requirements, but he cannot be evil or chaotic. 
Although  a  very  small  number  of  neutral  characters 
choose to join, the order’s strict requirements and rules 
Order of 
Illumination 
 
symbol
Nightsong 
Guild 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs
Illus. by C. Lukacs


180
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
181
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
mean that only lawful characters find it appealing for 
long. The majority of the membership is lawful good, 
with a significant portion being lawful neutral.
  Character Benefits: 
The resources of the Order of 
Illumination  are  vast,  but  the  organization  is  careful 
never to put too many of these resources into the hands 
of  one  person,  however  trustworthy  that  person  may 
seem to be. Player characters who are members can count 
on shadowbane stalkers to provide a steady stream of 
rumors about evil or suspicious activity, and can find a 
safe place to rest and heal in any city that has a cathedral 
dedicated to the order. The order’s intolerance of evil 
means that it is willing to combat any real threat, but 
it won’t throw lives away needlessly just on the player 
characters’ say-so. If the PCs need help with a particularly 
evil foe or opposing force, they might be able to appeal 
to an individual inquisitor, but the DM has the final say 
in any such activities.
  The Order of Illumination greatly covets holy weapons, 
and it will pay 60% of a weapon’s value if it has the holy 
special ability. Likewise, the order prizes the destruction 
of evil items and weapons and will pay 60% of the value 
of any such item turned in by a member. The order sees 
the procurement of holy items and the destruction of 
unholy items as among its most important duties.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Personalities vary greatly 
between the members of the two arms of the Order of 
Illumination.
  Those affiliated with the shadowbane stalkers prefer 
unobtrusive  methods  of  finding  evil.  They  lace  their 
dialogue  with  subtle  questions,  use  deceit  whenever 
they feel such behavior is warranted by the greater good, 
and often hide their affiliation with the order in order to 
better discover the true intentions of those they meet. 
Shadowbane  stalkers  are  often  quiet  individuals  who 
carefully watch the effects that their words and actions 
have on others. They are just as suspicious and reactionary 
as the inquisitors, but they are less open and vocal about 
both of these traits.
  Members  affiliated  with  the  shadowbane  inquisi
-
tors, on the other hand, rely on physical power and an 
unquestioning sense of what’s right to battle evil openly. 
Unwavering in their devotion to what they define as law 
and good, the inquisitors are blunt speakers who assume 
guilt or hidden motives in most individuals. They are 
highly suspicious of others and seem driven more by 
zeal than by regard for the facts.
  Typical Member: 
Most  members  of  the  Order  of 
Illumination are low-level clerics and paladins dedicated 
to a deity of law, good, destruction, or war. The order’s 
teachings blend these faiths together into a pure quest 
to  rid  the  world  of  evil.  Most  members  with  more 
experience end up taking a level or two in rogue and 
then pursue one of the two prestige classes associated 
with  the  order.  Although  members  of  other  classes 
join the order all the time, the group encourages new 
members to begin training as either a cleric or a paladin 
(if they haven’t already done so) to prepare for entry 
into one of the shadowbane prestige classes. Although 
a typical member may be too inexperienced to enter 
those prestige classes, each still thinks of himself or 
herself as serving one of the two branches. For example, 
a 1st-level paladin in the service of the order probably 
thinks of himself as a shadowbane inquisitor-in-training 
even though he’s several levels away from meeting the 
prestige class prerequisites, while a 1st-level cleric/1st-
level rogue who has served the stalkers for a few years 
considers herself a potential shadowbane stalker even 
though she might never meet the requirements for the 
prestige class.
  Prestige Classes: 
The two prestige classes associated 
with the order represent the pinnacle of the two arms of 
the group. The shadowbane stalkers ferret out evil, and 
the shadowbane inquisitors confront evil directly. Both 
classes require a mix of cleric and rogue (or paladin and 
rogue) abilities to meet the entry requirements, and these 
requirements shape the abilities of the bulk of the guild’s 
membership. The order expects all its members to aspire 
to one of the two classes.
  For  some  characters,  the  power  and  purity  of  the 
inquisitor is difficult to maintain, and those who fall 
from its demanding standards often end up becoming 
some of evil’s most powerful and dedicated servants—
blackguards.  These  traitors  are  a  dark  blight  on  the 
light of the order, and they are its greatest foe. What’s 
worse, such villains often maintain the illusion that they 
retain their former status and operate from within the 
order for long periods of time before their evil is finally 
discovered.
  Lore of the Guild: 
One of the order’s most deadly 
foes, a blackguard known only by rumor and reputation, 
supposedly works from within the highest ranks of the 
organization  itself.  This  villain  has  reportedly  killed 
or subverted any member who has ever come close to 
discovering his true identity, yet rumors of his existence 
persist. The order officially denies the existence of such 
an  individual  and  strictly  forbids  its  members  from 
discussing such rumors. However, paladin comrades use 
detect evil
 on the membership with surprising frequency, 
and it is extremely unusual for a member to refuse being 
the subject of such a spell.
  An Order of Illumination Campaign: 
The Order 
of Illumination has a complex relationship with the evil 
that it fights, and a campaign that features one or more 
members can give the PCs a chance to explore their own 
definition of good in the light of the extremist stance 
taken  by  the  group.  Likewise,  there  are  many  rich 
roleplaying opportunities in a campaign that features 
the order as a collection of good-aligned extremists 
that serve as antagonists of characters who are also 
good-aligned but have a more tolerant outlook.
Sample Order of Illumination Member
 
Gabriel  Silverbrow:
  Male  human 
rogue  1/paladin  2;  CR  3;  Medium 
humanoid; HD 1d6 plus 2d10; hp 17; 
Init  +1;  Spd  30  ft.;  AC  16,  touch  11, 
flat-footed 15; Base Atk +2; Grp +4; Atk or Full 
Atk +5 melee (2d6+3, masterwork greatsword); 
SA smite evil 1/day, sneak attack +1d6; SQ aura of 
good, 
detect evil
, lay on hands 4/day, trapfinding; 
AL LG; SV Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +3; Str 14, Dex 
12, Con 10, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 15.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Diplomacy +4, Disable Device 
+5, Gather Information +8, Hide +2, Intimidate +6, 
Knowledge (religion) +1, Listen +5, Open Lock +7, 
Search +5, Sense Motive +7; Cleave, Investigator, 
Power Attack.
  Language:
 Common.
 
Smite  Evil  (Su):
  Once  per  day,  Gabriel  can 
attempt to smite evil with one normal melee attack. 
He adds +2 to his attack roll and deals 2 additional 
points of damage.
 
Sneak Attack (Ex):
 Gabriel deals an extra 1d6 
points of damage on any successful attack against 
flat-footed or flanked targets, or against a target that 
has been denied its Dexterity bonus for any reason. 
This damage also applies to ranged attacks against 
targets up to 30 feet away. Creatures with conceal
-
ment, creatures without discernible anatomies, and 
creatures immune to extra damage from critical 
hits are all immune to sneak attacks. Gabriel can 
choose to deliver nonlethal damage with his sneak 
attack, but only when using a weapon designed for 
that purpose, such as a sap (blackjack).
 
Detect Evil
 (
Sp):
 Gabriel can use 
detect evil
 at will. See 
the spell, page 218 of the 
Player’s Handbook
.
 
Trapfinding (Ex):
 Gabriel can find, disarm, or bypass 
traps with a DC of 20 or higher. He can use the Search 
skill  to  find,  and  the  Disable  Device  skill  to  disarm, 
magic traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used to create 
it). If his Disable Device result exceeds the trap’s DC by 
10 or more, he discovers how to bypass the trap without 
triggering or disarming it.
 
Possessions: +1 chain shirt,
 masterwork greatsword, 
2 
elixirs  of  hiding,  potion  of  cure  moderate  wounds
, 
masterwork thieves’ tools, 12 gp.
SHADOWMIND GUILD
In the dark corners of the city, an elusive group of 
psionic spies ply their trade with uncanny skill. 
The Shadowmind Guild is a tight-knit band of 
high-level rogue/psions who use their varied 
skill  sets  to  maintain  anonymity 
while accepting commissions from 
wealthy  and  influential  patrons. 
The guild has no single specialty; most of its 
missions involve stealing something of value, 
using blackmail or psionic powers to influence 
the actions of a specific individual, or discover
-
ing a prized piece of information.
   While they are willing to engage in activities 
such as theft and blackmail, the shadowminds 
are  not  yet  wholly  evil.  They  shy  away  from 
assassination unless they are avenging a deliber
-
ate attack, and they seldom work directly against 
the good of the kingdom or city in which they 
reside.  The  guild  has  no  particular  loyalty  to 
monarch or community, but the organization’s 
leaders are smart enough to realize that a group 
as  small  as  theirs  would  not  likely  survive  an 
attack coordinated by a powerful ruler. The guild 
is willing to risk the enmity of individual nobles 
or wealthy merchants, but not the ire of an entire 
kingdom or city.
   Because of the guild’s shadowy reputation and 
the  fearsome  combination  of  skills  its  members 
possess, few are willing to cross the shadowminds, 
and  few  can  afford  their  rates.  Thus,  they  often 
work on their own initiative to gather information, 
undertake  special  missions  of  their  own  design, 
and  even  adventure  outside  their  home  territory 
to hone their skills in different environments and 
open combat.
  Joining  the  Shadowmind  Guild: 
The  exclusive 
Shadowmind Guild is slow to grant membership to even 
Shadowmind 
 
Guild symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


182
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
183
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
the most trusted of candidates. Membership is by invita
-
tion only, and the existing guild members take the time 
to be sure of the abilities and loyalty of every potential 
member. Since those with a predilection for both stealth 
and psionics are rare, the Shadowmind Guild is careful 
to monitor any such individuals within the city. Once a 
candidate’s varied abilities have developed to the point 
where she qualifies for the shadowmind prestige class, 
the guild decides whether or not to extend an invita
-
tion. These decisions are complex and depend greatly 
on the personalities of current guild members, and the 
DM has a great deal of discretion when resolving such 
invitations.
  Character Benefits: 
Characters who belong to the 
Shadowmind Guild gain a +4 bonus on Gather Informa
-
tion checks when in the guild’s home city, and they have 
ready access to two or three nondescript and well-hidden 
safe houses within the city. These benefits are not to be 
taken lightly and depend on the good opinion of the other 
guild members. These privileges are instantly withdrawn 
from any member who ever openly discusses the guild 
with nonmembers, whether the act is committed will
-
fully or through incompetence.
  Roleplaying  Suggestions: 
Guild  members  rarely 
reveal their affiliation with the guild and often act in 
disguise, making it difficult to categorize their personali
-
ties or general behavior. Members must be circumspect 
in their dealings and refrain from drawing suspicion to 
themselves as well.
  Typical Member: 
Because its membership is so small 
and so skilled, the Shadowmind Guild has no typical 
low-level member as other guilds do. All are of high 
level and are highly trained, and they all possess unique 
and varied skill sets. Few members even manifest the 
same psionic powers, although abilities that enhance 
stealth or cloud the minds of others are common. For 
a sample member of the Shadowmind Guild, see Mysk 
on page 
76
.
  Prestige Classes: 
Only one prestige class—the shad
-
owmind—is directly associated with the guild, and all 
members must have at least one level in the class. Some 
guild members also have levels in another prestige class, 
typically either the shadowdancer class or a psionic class, 
but most pursue additional levels in the shadowmind 
class to the exclusion of others.
  Lore of the Guild: 
Despite  the  care  of  individual 
members to keep their activities secret, a few rumors 
and  tales  of  the  Shadowmind  Guild’s  exploits  have 
reached the general populace. The most common of these 
describes the fate of a small-minded lord who publicly 
denounced the guild and devoted much of his personal 
wealth to finding and destroying the group. The noble 
not only lost his fortune to a mysterious group of thieves, 
but he also forgot he ever had such wealth or power. 
The tale holds that the noble still works peacefully in 
his city today as a modest tradesman, unaware that the 
memories he believes are his own are really the result 
of careful manipulation by the shadowminds.
  A Shadowmind Guild Campaign: 
Although  the 
Shadowmind Guild is small and exclusive, its members 
have incredibly varied skill sets, making the guild an 
interesting choice as the focus of a psionics-oriented 
campaign.  However,  it’s  much  more  likely  that  only 
one character in an adventuring party belongs to the 
guild, and perhaps she even conceals her involvement 
from most or all of her comrades. The member will have 
mysterious contacts and a decided advantage when gath
-
ering information in the guild’s home city, which can 
be a great boon to a DM looking for ways to introduce 
adventure leads, rumors, and conflicting information 
to the PCs.
  Because of its small, high-level membership, the Shad
-
owmind Guild does not provide a reasonable challenge 
for PCs throughout the length of a campaign, and it is 
best used as a single high-level encounter or as a small 
group of experts hired by the characters’ true foes.
TALESPINNERS LEAGUE
Centuries ago, some members of the College of Con
-
crescent Lore objected on philosophical grounds to the 
organization’s secretive approach to information. Their 
desire to share information with outsiders literally tore 
the  college  in  two.  The  disaffected  members  formed 
the Talespinners League, a college devoted to the free 
flow of information. Since that time, league members 
have honed their performance skills and branched out 
beyond the history and arcana studies that Concrescent 
Lorists favor. Many Talespinners are bards, but occasional 
arcane spellcasters are also welcome, especially if they 
are members of the virtuoso prestige class.
 
The  Talespinners  League  collects  every  kind  of 
lore  imaginable.  Not  as  academic  as  the  College  of 
Concrescent Lore, Talespinners study down-to-earth 
topics such as the everyday traditions of various cul
-
tures. Members spend their time gathering all kinds 
of  information.
 
Rather  than  relying  on  academic 
reports to disperse it, the league embeds its lore within 
historical or fictitious tales. Any member is free to 
specialize if desired, but anyone can change specialties 
at a moment’s notice.
 
The Talespinners League is based on the master-appren
-
tice relationship. New students learn lore from masters 
and eventually become masters themselves. The mas
-
ters in each region meet once or twice a year and make 
any necessary decisions by a simple majority vote. (Usu
-
ally, there aren’t many pressing issues, because league 
members tend not to involve themselves with politics.) 
Once that part of the meeting is over, other 
invited members arrive, and the gath
-
ering becomes a grand exercise in 
tale-swapping.  Each  member 
who  attends  is  expected  as 
a matter of courtesy to 
share  (via  a  tale) 
any new lore un
-
covered  since 
the last meeting. 
Keeping  secrets 
is  against  the 
league’s  code  of 
conduct,  but  the 
only  penalty  for 
doing  so  is  a  lack 
of tales to tell at the 
regional  meeting. 
Secretive or trouble
-
some Talespinners are rarely booted 
out of the league. They just don’t get invita
-
tions to future meetings, and the rest of the 
college learns to ignore them.
 
The league’s motto is “The heart of the tale 
is in the telling.” Talespinners don’t wear robes, but many 
add blue and white tassels to their clothing.
 
Talespinners regard the College of Concrescent Lore 
with contempt for “wanting to keep the most interest
-
ing things in the world locked up for their private little 
club.” Because they travel a great deal, they are generally 
cordial toward members of the League of Boot and Trail. 
In addition, they love to quiz adventurers about the perils 
they have faced.
  Joining the Talespinners League: 
Because the Tales
-
pinners League is nothing more than chains of masters 
and apprentices, the only prerequisite for membership is 
gaining a mentor. To achieve this, a candidate must tell 
the prospective mentor three tales, making a successful 
DC 25 Perform check for each. One story must be about 
the candidate, one about a stranger, and the third about 
one of the candidate’s friends. Choosing tales particularly 
suited to the listener provides a +2 circumstance bonus on 
the check. A candidate who fails to impress one mentor 
can try again with another if desired.
  Once a candidate is accepted, his or her apprenticeship 
proceeds  entirely  at  the  mentor’s  whim.  The  process 
typically lasts for several months and involves learning 
hundreds  of  new  tales  and  performance  techniques. 
The apprentice earns the title Master Talespinner at the 
mentor’s discretion. Only a Talespinner who 
has been a master for at least five years 
can take on apprentices.
   The Talespinners League has 
no  official  admission 
fee. However, men
-
tors have been 
known to hint 
that a suitably 
expensive gift 
speeds  the 
appl icat ion 
process along.
  Character 
Benefits: 
The 
biggest benefit 
of membership 
is access to the 
college’s treasure trove of lore. It’s 
free for the asking, because Talespin
-
ners love nothing more than to exchange 
stories of far-off lands, arcane enigmas, and mys
-
terious  creatures.  Unlike  their  academic  rivals, 
however, they lack any organized means of cata
-
loging their lore. Thus, an apprentice’s query about 
a particular item might produce the following 
sort of reply: “A few years back, someone at the 
northern meeting mentioned a jade statue just 
like the one you’re asking about. But I can’t recall 
who it was. Kardalius over in Baselton might remember 
who told that tale . . .”
   Talespinners travel frequently, and they eagerly swap 
stories and render assistance to fellow collegians, rec
-
ognizing them by the blue and white tassels they wear. 
Clever innkeepers look for the tassels, too, and many 
offer  discounts  to  members  who  are  willing  to  spin 
yarns by the fire.
  Roleplaying Suggestions: 
Talespinners love to talk, 
especially if doing so involves drawing a story that they 
haven’t heard before out of an interesting individual. They 
Talespinners 
 
League 
 
symbol
Illus. by C. Lukacs


184
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
185
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
are open, curious, and usually quite engaging. One who 
joins an adventuring party often serves as the group’s 
primary negotiator, using his skills to smooth the group’s 
way with local authorities, ferreting out countless adven
-
ture leads through his association with the league, and 
providing a wealth of information through his diverse 
knowledge.
  Despite this common archetype, a few members go 
against the grain. These unusually introverted individuals 
approach storytelling as an art form, breaking out of their 
normally shy behavior only when properly prepared to 
tell a story. They see the exchange of information in story 
form as an opportunity to create and inspire. Although 
they are rare, they often are among the most respected 
storytellers in the league.
  Typical Member: 
The typical Talespinner is a low-
level bard who loves to travel and learn new stories. The 
membership also includes many low-level wizards (who 
see the organization as a way to learn of new sources of 
magical lore) and small numbers of other adventurers 
who seek knowledge for its own sake.
  Prestige Classes: 
No single prestige class is associ
-
ated with the Talespinners League, although many of 
the league’s members pursue prestige classes related to 
their combat abilities rather than their involvement in the 
group. Many combat-oriented members strive to attain 
levels in the war chanter prestige class (from 
Complete 
Warrior
),  and  spellcasters  associated  with  the  league 
often seek out prestige classes that boost their powers 
of divination or observation.
  Lore of the Guild: 
The Talespinners’ split with the 
College of Concrescent Lore is the most significant event 
in the League’s history. It was the cause of the League’s 
founding  and  the  event  that  defined  its  purpose  and 
shaped the outlook of its members.
  By  its  very  nature,  the  Talespinners  League  is  rife 
with news of recent events, rumors of things to come, 
and legends of days long past. Recently, however, many 
members have begun to hunt for information regarding 
a golden book of lore rumored to have been penned over 
a thousand years ago. This tome, said to contain the com
-
plete history of a long-vanished empire, can supposedly 
cause the true version of any story that is told near it to 
appear on its pages. As seekers of the truth, the Talespin
-
ners are eager to locate this powerful magic item—if it 
really exists.
  A Talespinners League Campaign: 
Although the 
Talespinners League probably serves a campaign best as 
a background organization to which one or two PCs at 
most belong, it can serve as the focus of a campaign. If 
most of the PCs are affiliated with the league, the cam
-
paign should feature an abundance of rumors and other 
information, and the characters might juggle half a dozen 
adventure leads, at least until they successfully complete 
a few adventures and focus on a particular branch of 
lost knowledge or special lore. Such a campaign should 
include a fair amount of social interaction in addition to 
the exploration of lost tombs and physical searches for 
lost tales.
Sample Talespinner
 
Garret Greenbarrel:
 Male halfling bard 3; CR 3; Small 
humanoid; HD 3d6+3; hp 16; Init +2; Spd 20 ft.; AC 17, 
touch 13, flat-footed 15; Base Atk +2; Grp –3; Atk or Full 
Atk  +3  melee  (1d6–1/19–20,  masterwork  longsword) 
or +6 ranged (1d6/19–20, masterwork light crossbow); 
SA spells; SQ bardic knowledge +5, bardic music 3/day 
(countersong, 
fascinate,
 inspire competence, inspire cour
-
age), halfling traits; AL CG; SV Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +3 
(+5 against fear); Str 8, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 14, Wis 10, 
Cha 15.
 
Skills and Feats:
 Bluff +8, Climb +1, Decipher Script +8, 
Diplomacy +6, Gather Information +8, Jump –3, Knowl
-
edge (geography) +5, Knowledge (local) +5, Listen +8, 
Perform (oratory) +8, Sense Motive +6, Speak Language 
(Draconic, Giant, Gnome, Goblin, Orc, Sylvan); Extra 
Music†, Obscure Lore†.
  † New feat described in Chapter 3.
  Languages:
 Common, Halfling; Dwarven, Elven.
  Bardic  Music:
  Use  bardic  music  three  times  per 
day. See the bard class feature, page 29 of the 
Player’s 
Handbook.
 
Countersong (Su):
 Use music or poetics to counter magi
-
cal effects that depend on sound.
 
Fascinate (Sp):
 Use music or poetics to cause one or more 
creatures to become fascinated with him.
 
Inspire Competence (Su):
 Use music or poetics to help 
an ally succeed at a task.
 
Inspire Courage (Su):
 Use music or poetics to bolster his 
allies against fear and improve their combat abilities.
 
Spells Known
 (3/2; caster level 3rd): 0—
dancing lights, 
ghost sound 
(DC 12), 
light, lullaby
 (DC 12), 
message;
 1st—
cure 
light wounds, inspirational boost
†
, swift expeditious retreat
†.
  † New spell described in Chapter 5.
 
Possessions:
  Mithral  shirt,  masterwork  longsword, 
masterwork light crossbow with 20 bolts, 
potion of eagle’s 
splendor,
 3 smokesticks, backpack, bedroll, waterskin, 3 
days’ trail rations, pack mule, 24 pp.
BUILDING AN 
ORGANIZATION
This section lays out a framework to help you build 
organizations for your 
D
UNGEONS
 & D
RAGONS
 campaign. 
Using a system similar to the town generation rules in 
the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
, you can craft anything from 
a tiny boating partnership in the local village to a sprawl
-
ing thieves’ guild in your favorite metropolis, including 
the organization’s type and size, dominant alignment, 
resources available, leadership, racial demographics, and 
class and level makeup of the entire group.
  The organizations detailed earlier in this chapter don’t 
necessarily  follow  this  format,  since  most  are  spread 
across  many  communities.  When  using  one  of  these 
organizations in your game, you may want to use the 
guidelines below to set up a particular town’s or city’s 
branch of the guild.
Table 6–1: Organization Types
d%  Type of Organization 
Typical Alignment*
01–40  Trade (roll d% for subtype) 
—
    01–45  Craft guild 
LG, NG, LN, N, LE, NE
    46–90  Profession guild 
LG, NG, LN, N, LE, NE
    91–00  Adventurers guild 
Any
41–55  Religious (roll d% for subtype) 
—
    01–60  Holy order 
Any
    61–80  Druid shrine 
NG, LN, N, CN, NE
    81–90  Fringe cult 
Any
    91–00  Paladin order 
LG
56–70  Learning (roll d% for subtype) 
—
    01–40  University 
LG, NG, LN, N, LE, NE
    41–55  Bardic college 
LG, NG, CG, LN, N, CN
    56–75  Monastery 
LG, LN, LE
    76–85  Spy network 
Any
    86–00  League of explorers    LG, NG, CG, LN, N, CN
71–80  Magical (roll d% for subtype) 
—
    01–50  Wizard college 
NG, LN, N, CN, NE
    51–70   Alchemists conclave 
NG, LN, N, CN, NE
    71–90  Arcanist academy 
NG, LN, N, CN, NE
    91–00  Guild of sorcery 
NG, LN, N, CN, NE
81–90  Criminal (roll d% for subtype) 
—
    01–30  Thieves guild 
N, CN, LE, NE, CE
    31–40  Assassins guild 
LE, NE, CE
    41–50  Beggars guild 
N, CN, LE, NE, CE
    51–70   Street gang 
N, CN, NE, CE
    71–80  Crime syndicate 
LN, N, CN, LE, NE, CE
    81–90  Smugglers cartel 
Any
    91–95  Anarchist band 
CG, CN, CE
    96–100 Freedom fighters 
CG, CN, CE
91–95  Reroll twice and combine the results 
—
96–100 Other (DM’s option) 
Any
* See Alignment, below, and Table 6–2 for more details and 
options.
STEP 1: TYPE
An organization’s type describes its role in society, from 
a simple craft guild to a sprawling crime syndicate. If 
you haven’t already decided on the type of organization 
you want to create, use Table 6–1: Organization Types 
to randomly generate this information. The table isn’t 
meant as an exhaustive list of the range of possibilities, 
but as a spur to your creativity.
STEP 2: ALIGNMENT
Every organization has a default alignment that describes 
the group’s general outlook on moral and ethical issues. 
Not all members’ alignments match this default, but most 
probably are no more than one step removed.
  The alignment of an organization need not match the 
dominant alignment of its community, although many 
do. If you haven’t already selected your organization’s 
alignment,  roll  randomly  on  Table  6–2:  Organization 
Alignment. Most organizations tend to be lawful (the 
most stable of alignments). Some alignments might not 
match well with certain organization types (see Table 
6–1: Organization Types for typical alignments), but that 
doesn’t mean you can’t creatively mix these two elements 
to form a unique organization, so long as you can come 
up with a sufficiently persuasive rationale.
Table 6–2: Organization Alignment
d% 
Organization Alignment
01–25    Same as community’s primary power center
26–30    Opposite of community’s primary power center*
31–45    Lawful good
46–55    Neutral good
56–60    Chaotic good
61–73    Lawful neutral
74–80    Neutral
81–83    Chaotic neutral
84–93    Lawful evil
94–98    Neutral evil
99–100   Chaotic evil
* If the community’s primary power center is neutral, roll 
again.
Alignment Descriptions
 
Lawful Good:
 A lawful good organization strives to 
help others, but tempers its kindness with devotion to 
the letter of the law and attention to detail and policies. 
Many centers of learning are lawful good.
 
Neutral  Good: 
These  organizations  seek  to  help 
those in need with little regard toward influencing a 
community’s power structure. Many charitable organiza
-
tions are neutral good.


186
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
187
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
 
Chaotic  Good:
  An  organization  of  this  alignment 
works tirelessly to protect people from tyranny. Chaotic 
good  organizations  are  always  trying  to  do  the  right 
thing, but a lack of communication and forethought often 
causes plans to fail or members of the group to work at 
cross-purposes. Such a group might serve any function 
from peaceful protesters to freedom fighters.
 
Lawful Neutral:
 Most lawful neutral organizations 
exist for their own purposes as much as for that of their 
members. They tend toward bureaucracy and codified 
regulations, and they stress the need for order above all 
else. Many trade guilds are lawful neutral.
 
Neutral:
 Truly neutral organizations care little for the 
surrounding  community,  instead  spending  their  time 
furthering their own goals. They tend to be the most wel
-
coming of differing viewpoints. Many arcane guilds are 
neutral, respecting each wizard’s right to her own beliefs.
 
Chaotic Neutral:
 While most chaotic neutral organi
-
zations claim to fight for personal freedoms and against 
the encroachment of governmental power, many simply 
exist for the sake of creating contention. A chaotic neutral 
organization might be a group of vandals, anarchists, or 
revolutionaries.
 
Lawful  Evil:
  A  lawful  evil  organization  uses  the 
community’s  laws  and  regulations  to  its  own  benefit, 
furthering its goals at the expense of those less able to 
exploit the rules. Perhaps ironically, lawful evil organiza
-
tions can (and do) exist quite well in lawful good societies, 
simply because they are willing to follow the laws (unless 
they can get away with breaking them). Expansionist or 
monopolistic trade guilds might be lawful evil.
 
Neutral Evil:
 A neutral evil organization looks out 
for the needs of its members above all else. Most thieves 
guilds are neutral evil.
 
Chaotic Evil:
 Such an organization exists solely to 
help its individual members spread hatred, destruction, 
and mayhem. A murder cult is one example of a chaotic 
evil organization.
STEP 3: SIZE
Determine how large the organization is and where it is 
based. If you haven’t already chosen a size based on your 
campaign needs, roll on Table 6–3: Organization Size. The 
size (minor, medium, or major) will help you determine 
the organization’s member population.
Table 6–3: Organization Size
d% 
Organization Size
01–40 
Minor
1
41–90 
Medium
2
91–100 
Major
1 Minor organizations don’t exist in thorps or hamlets.
2 Medium organizations don’t exist in thorps.
STEP 4: 
 
POPULATION AND RESOURCES
After determining the relative size of your organization, 
use the appropriate column on Table 6–4: Membership 
by Community Size to determine its population. If you’ve 
already decided on the membership’s size and population, 
you can skip this step.
  Just like a community, every organization has a gold 
piece limit to its resources based on its size and popula
-
tion. The gold piece limit is an indicator of the maximum 
amount of money the organization can afford to spend 
in any given week, on any one item, or in pursuit of any 
given objective.
  The  gold  piece  limit  noted  in  Table  6–4  is  for  a 
medium  organization.  A  minor  organization  has  a 
gold piece limit of one-half the indicated value, while 
a major organization has a gold piece limit of twice the 
indicated value.
  To determine the amount of ready cash in an organiza
-
tion, or the total value of any given item of equipment 
for sale at any given time, multiply half the gp limit by 
1/10 of the organization’s membership.
STEP 5: DEMOGRAPHICS
To effectively use an organization in play, you must know 
its composition. The following guidelines allow you to 
determine the most common classes and races repre
-
sented and the levels of the various members belonging 
to the group, from the leader down to the lowest-ranking 
associates.
Class Demographics
The mix of classes represented in any given organization 
depends on whether that group is exclusive (limiting 
its membership almost wholly to a single occupation), 
mixed (with a dominant class and a small representation 
of other classes), or integrated (including members from 
a wide variety of classes).
Table 6–5: Class Mix
Exclusive
     Primary class 
96%
     Secondary class 
2%
     Tertiary class 
1%
     Other classes 
1%
Mixed
     Primary class 
79%
     Secondary class 
9%
     Tertiary class 
5%
     Tertiary class 
3%
     Tertiary class 
2%
     Other classes 
2%
Integrated
     Primary class 
37%
     Secondary class 
20%
     Tertiary class 
18%
     Tertiary class 
10%
     Tertiary class 
7%
     Tertiary class 
5%
     Other classes 
3%
  You should decide on a primary class based on the 
type, alignment, and location of your organization. For 
instance, most trade-based organizations count experts 
as  their  primary  class,  while  religious  organizations 
have adepts, clerics, and other divine spellcasters in the 
majority. Most thieves guilds are mixed, with a majority 
of rogues but a fair number of experts, warriors, fighters, 
bards, and other characters. A typical wizard academy 
might  be  exclusive  (limiting  its  membership  almost 
entirely to pure wizards) or mixed (with sorcerers and 
other arcane casters joining the assemblage). An adventur
-
ers guild is likely to be highly integrated, with members 
of all walks of life. Don’t forget to include one or more 
NPC classes in your demographics, particularly warriors 
and experts.
Highest-Level Members
Use Table 6–6 and Table 6–7 to determine the highest-
level character in the primary class of your organization. 
Roll the dice indicated for the class that you have deter
-
mined is primary, and apply the modifier based on the 
size of the community found in Table 6–9.
  For secondary, tertiary, and other classes, use Table 6–8 
to determine the highest-level character based on the 
town size. For instance, in a small city, the highest-level 
character of the organization’s secondary class will be 
one-half the result derived from Table 6–6 or 6–7, while 
the highest-level character of the organization’s tertiary 
classes will be one-fourth the normal result. Characters 
of other classes will be 1st level.
Table 6–6: Highest-Level Members (PC Classes)
PC Class 
Character Level (Primary Class)
Barbarian 
1d4 + community modifier
Bard 
1d6 + community modifier
Cleric 
1d6 + community modifier
Druid 
1d6 + community modifier
Fighter 
1d8 + community modifier
Monk 
1d4 + community modifier
Paladin 
1d3 + community modifier
Ranger 
1d3 + community modifier
Rogue 
1d8 + community modifier
Sorcerer 
1d4 + community modifier
Wizard 
1d4 + community modifier
Table 6–7: Highest-Level Members (NPC Classes)
NPC Class 
Character Level (Primary Class)
Adept 
1d6 + community modifier
Aristocrat 
1d4 + community modifier
Commoner 
4d4 + community modifier
Expert 
3d4 + community modifier
Warrior 
2d4 + community modifier
  In  larger  communities,  there  is  a  chance  that  the 
highest-level character in the secondary class will use 
the normal result from Table 6–6 or 6–7, and a chance 
that the highest-level character in the tertiary class will 
be determined just as for the secondary class. The high
-
est-level character in all other classes will be half the 
result  derived  for  the  tertiary  class.  Round  fractional 
results down, but treat any result of less than 1st level as 
1st level.
  In any organization, there is a 5% chance that a single 
member  who  doesn’t  belong  to  the  group’s  primary, 
secondary,  or  tertiary  classes  will  have  a  level  equal 
to (or higher than) the highest-level character in your 
organization’s primary class. This character might repre
-
sent a “wild card” in the organization, a unique member, 
or simply a fish out of water.
Table 6–4: Membership by Community Size
Community 
Community 
  Organization Membership
1
 
GP
Size 
Population 
Minor 
Medium 
Major 
Limit
2
Thorp 
20–80 
n/a 
n/a 
1–2 
20 gp
Hamlet 
81–400 
n/a 
1–2 
3–5 
50 gp
Village 
401–900 
1–2 
3–5 
6–10 
100 gp
Small town 
901–2,000 
3–5 
6–10 
11–25 
400 gp
Large town 
2,001–5,000 
6–10 
11–25 
26–60 
1,500 gp
Small city 
5,001–12,000 
11–25 
26–60 
61–125 
7,500 gp
Large city 
12,001–25,000 
26–60 
61–125 
126–250 
20,000 gp
Metropolis 
25,001+ 
61–125 
126–250 
251+ 
50,000 gp
1  These numbers can be used to represent how many members exist in a given community; they need not represent the total 
number of members in the organization.
2  Halve the indicated value for minor organizations, and double it for major organizations.


188
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
189
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
Table 6–9: Community Modifiers
Community 
Community
Size 
Modifier
Thorp 
–3*
Hamlet 
–2*
Village 
–1
Small town 
+0
Large town 
+3
Small city 
+6
Large city 
+9
Metropolis 
+12
* A thorp or a hamlet has a 5% chance to add +10 to the 
modifier of a ranger or druid level.
Total Characters of Each Class
Use the following method to determine the levels of all 
the characters in an organization of any given class.
  If the highest-level character of a given class indicated 
is 4th level or above, assume that there is one additional 
character of that class of half that level. If this process 
results in a character who is 4th level or higher, assume 
that there are two characters of half that character’s level. 
Continue until the number of 2nd- or 3rd-level charac
-
ters is generated. Do not generate 1st-level members in 
this manner.
  After you have determined the number of 2nd- and 
3rd-level characters of each class, divide the remaining 
population so that it matches the class demographics of 
the organization. For instance, if 37% of an organization 
are rogues, then 37% of the leftover membership are 
1st-level rogues. Repeat for each class present in the 
organization.
  You can also round out any organization with a few 
characters of classes not represented in the organization’s 
typical  mix.  For  instance,  even  if  your  thieves  guild 
doesn’t have a listing for wizards, you can still add one 
to the membership. Don’t forget to include multiclass 
or prestige-class characters as appropriate.
  Your final membership numbers—particularly the 
1st-level characters of PC classes—might not match 
up well with the expected quantity of that class in 
the  community,  as  indicated  in  Chapter  5  of  the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
. Don’t worry too much about 
this. That book’s method of determining the number 
of characters with PC class levels might be too con
-
servative for your campaign, particularly if you have 
many cities and metropolises (which are likely to have 
large, powerful organizations). If you need a reason 
for this discrepancy, consider the possibility that the 
organization has drawn a great number of members 
from outlying towns and villages. Also, remember that 
many low-level characters might belong to more than 
one organization.
Leader of the Organization
The  leader  of  an  organization  is  usually  the  highest-
level character of the primary class. Roll on Table 6–10: 
Organization Leader or select an appropriate character 
to lead the group.
Table 6–10: Organization Leader
d% 
Leader
01–70 
Highest-level character of primary class
71–85 
Second-highest-level character of primary class
86–95 
Highest-level character (regardless of class)
96–100    Other (DM’s choice)
Racial Demographics
Most organizations mirror the local racial mix, though 
exceptions are common. Use Table 6–11: Racial Demo
-
graphics,  or  select  an  appropriate  racial  mix  for  your 
organization.
Table 6–11: Racial Demographics
d% 
Demographics
01–60 
Same as community
1
61–90 
More isolated than community
2
91–100     More integrated than community
3
1  See the Racial Mix of Communities table, page 139 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide.
2  Use the racial mix one step toward isolated. If the 
community already uses the isolated racial mix, treat as 
isolated.
3  Use the racial mix one step toward integrated. If the 
community already uses the integrated racial mix, treat as 
integrated.
STEP 6: FLESH OUT THE DETAILS
At  this  point,  all  that’s  left  is  to  breathe  life  into  the 
framework you’ve created. Provide the organization with 
a name, turn your NPCs into full-fledged characters (with 
personalities and backgrounds as appropriate), and link 
the organization to your campaign history.
  Now’s the time to determine other crucial details about 
the group you’ve created. Is it a secretive organization 
whose existence is known only to its members? Even 
a craft guild might pride itself on secrecy and mystery. 
How hard or easy is it to join the group? What kind of 
insignias,  code  words,  or  secret  handshakes  does  the 
group  use?  Does  the  group  enjoy  support  (whether 
public or private) from local authorities, or is it a renegade 
assembly? Is the organization respected by the populace, 
or are its members social pariahs?
  These and other details are what will transform your 
organization from a mere collection of numbers into a 
full-fledged part of your campaign.
APPENDIX: 
 
THE EPIC ADVENTURER
The 
Player’s Handbook
 establishes 20th level as the limit of 
a character’s power and experience. The 
Dungeon Master’s 
Guide
,  however,  provides  rules  for  going  beyond  that 
limit to 21st level and higher. Such characters are called 
epic-level characters and use slightly modified rules to 
govern their interactions.
  This  section  addresses  some  issues  relevant  to  epic 
skill-using characters, from becoming an epic character, 
to advancing to epic levels in prestige classes, to new epic 
feats.
BECOMING AN EPIC-LEVEL 
ADVENTURER
The passage from everyday hero to epic hero isn’t a given 
fact of life in all games. Every DM has his or her own 
opinions about how (or if) to incorporate epic-level char
-
acters into the campaign. Assuming that your campaign 
offers characters the opportunity to achieve 21st level, 
this section provides some advice for the player and DM 
of a rogue, ranger, bard, or similar character to use when 
approaching that point.
  More than any other type of character, great adventur
-
ers of lore are identified with daring tasks of guile, skill, 
and sheer chutzpah. Jason led a band of mythic heroes on 
a great quest for the golden fleece. Orpheus braved the 
horrors of the underworld with only his musical talent 
to rescue his beloved Eurydice. The legendary hunter 
Orion claimed he could kill any animal in the world. Loki 
stole anything he could get his hands on, including the 
Golden Apples of Idun and the Necklace of Brisingamen. 
In order to reach 21st level, an adventurer might have to 
accomplish a task of such daring that even the gods take 
notice of his skill.
  Another mark of a legendary skilled character is his 
talent in a particular area of expertise. While anyone 
with 23 ranks in a single skill might claim to be the best 
in the world, epic contests involving such skills are the 
only way of proving such a claim. Whether such a contest 
takes the form of a series of ever more difficult tasks (such 
as a set of fiendishly trapped locks that must be opened 
safely) or a single challenge of titanic proportions (such 
as swimming across an ocean), the contest must be truly 
memorable in its scope and difficulty.
  You can, of course, use similar goals or quests even for 
nonepic characters. The accomplishment of a breathtak
-
ing mission or the defeat of a great opponent in a test 
Table 6–8: Highest-Level Character by Community Size
Secondary Class
Up to Small City 
Large City 
Metropolis
Divide Table 6–6 or 6–7 result by 2    01–75: Divide Table 6–6 or 6–7 result by 2   01–50: Divide Table 6–6 or 6–7 result by 2
 
76–100: Use Table 6–6 or 6–7 result 
51–100: Use Table 6–6 or 6–7 result
Tertiary Class
Up to Small City 
Large City 
Metropolis
Divide Table 6–6 or 6–7 result by 4    01–75: As secondary, but divide by 2 
01–50: As secondary, but divide by 2
 
76–100: Same as secondary 
51–100: Same as secondary
Other Class*
Up to Small City 
Large City 
Metropolis
Level 1 
As tertiary, but divide by 2 
As tertiary, but divide by 2
* There is a 5% chance that a single member of a miscellaneous class is calculated as if that character were the highest-level 
character in the primary class.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
OPTION: CREATE AN ORGANIZATIONAL 
STATISTICS BLOCK
Once you’ve designed your organization, you can use this ex
-
ample to create a statistics block for the group. This step isn’t 
necessary, but it helps you summarize the organization for easy 
reference.
   Name  (size):  AL  [alignment  abbreviation];  XX  gp  resource 
limit; membership XX [racial mix: isolated, mixed, or integrated] 
[(race XX%, race XX%, race XX%, and so on)]. The number fol
-
lowing each race name is a percentage of the entire membership, 
not the exact number of individuals of that race.
   Authority Figure(s): [Name, gender, race, class, and level for 
each.]
   Important Characters: [Name, gender, race, class, and level 
(title or position) for each.]
   Others: [Class mix: exclusive, mixed, or integrated]; [class and 
level (XX), class and level (XX), and so on]. The numbers in this 
entry are the exact numbers of residents of each class.
   Notes: Place any special notes about the organization here.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs


190
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
191
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
of skill are classic achievements for adventurers of all 
levels.
EPIC-LEVEL PRESTIGE CLASS 
CHARACTERS
The 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
 has information on advanc
-
ing  the  standard  classes  beyond  20th  level.  You  can 
also advance the class level of a ten-level prestige class 
beyond  10th  level,  but  only  if  your  character  level  is 
already  20th  or  higher.  You  cannot  advance  the  class 
level of a class with fewer than ten levels beyond the 
maximum described for that class, regardless of your 
character level.
  When your epic-level character advances a prestige class 
beyond 10th level, follow all the rules presented in the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
. In addition, you must create an 
epic-level progression for your prestige class, just as the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
 presents epic-level progressions 
for  the  classes  from  the 
Player’s  Handbook
.  Many,  but 
not all, class features continue to accumulate after 10th 
level. The following guidelines describe how to create 
an epic class progression, and are followed by a sample 
epic progression for the dungeon delver prestige class 
(see page 42
).
  —  Your  base  save  bonuses  and  base  attack  bonus 
don’t increase after character level 20th. Since you can’t 
achieve 11th level or higher in a prestige class without 
being at least a 21st-level character, there are no columns 
for base saves or base attacks for these classes beyond 
10th level. Instead, use Table 6–18: Epic Save and Epic 
Attack Bonuses, page 206 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
, 
to determine a character’s epic bonus on saving throws 
and attacks.
  — You continue to gain Hit Dice and skill points as 
normal beyond 10th level.
  —  Generally  speaking,  any  class  feature  that  uses 
class level as part of a mathematical formula, such as 
a shadowbane inquisitor’s smite damage, continues to 
increase as normal by class level. However, any prestige 
class feature that calculates a save DC using class level 
(such as the ghost-faced killer’s frightful attack) should 
add only half the character’s class levels above 10th. Thus, 
a 14th-level ghost-faced killer’s frightful attack would 
have a DC of 22 (10 + class level up to 10th + 1/2 class 
levels above 10th) + Charisma modifier. Without this 
adjustment, the save DCs for epic-level character prestige 
class abilities increase at a much greater rate than those 
for normal class abilities.
  — For spellcasters, caster level continues to increase 
after 10th level at the same rate it did during the first ten 
levels of the prestige class. Thus, a 13th-level vigilante 
adds 13 to his caster level derived from another class to 
determine total caster level. However, spells per day don’t 
increase after character level 20th. 
  — The powers of familiars, special mounts, and animal 
companions continue to increase as their masters gain 
levels, if they’re based on a formula that includes the 
character’s level.
  — Any class features that increase or accumulate as part 
of a repeated pattern (such as a dishonorable dread pirate’s 
sneak attack) also continue to increase or accumulate after 
10th level at the same rate. An exception to this rule is 
any bonus feat progression granted as a class feature. If 
you get bonus feats as part of a class feature, these do not 
increase with epic levels. Instead, these classes get a new 
bonus feat progression (which varies from class to class; 
see below).
  — In addition to the class features retained from non
-
epic levels, each class gains a bonus feat every two, three, 
four, or five levels after 10th. This bonus feat augments 
each class’s progression of class features, because not all 
classes otherwise improve class features after 10th level. 
These bonus feats are in addition to the feat that every 
character gets every three levels (as per Table 6–19: Epic 
Experience and Level-Dependent Benefits, page 206 of 
the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
). 
  — You don’t gain any new class features, because there 
aren’t any new class features described for these levels. 
Class  features  with  a  progression  that  slows  or  stops 
before 10th level and features that have a limited list of 
options do not improve as you gain epic levels. Likewise, 
class features that are gained only at a single level do not 
improve.
SAMPLE PRESTIGE CLASS EPIC 
PROGRESSION: DUNGEON DELVER
If  you  plan  on  venturing  into  trap-infested  dungeon 
complexes, there’s no one better to take along than the 
epic dungeon delver.
 
Hit Die: 
d6.
 
Skill  Points  at  Each  Additional  Level: 
8  +  Int 
modifier.
 
Trap Sense (Ex):
 An epic dungeon delver’s bonus on 
Reflex saves to avoid traps and his dodge bonus to AC 
against traps increase by 1 for every three levels above 
10th.
 
Augury (Sp):
 An epic dungeon delver can use 
augury
 
one additional time per day for every three levels above 
9th.
 
Skill Mastery (Ex):
 An epic dungeon delver can apply 
the effect of skill mastery to one additional class skill 
each time he attains a new level.
 
Blindsense (Ex):
  An  epic  dungeon  delver  can  use 
blindsense  one  additional  time  per  day  for  every  five 
levels above 10th.
 
Bonus Feats:
 An epic dungeon delver gains a bonus 
feat every three levels above 10th.
Dungeon Delver
Class Level 
Special
11th 
Skill Mastery
12th 
Augury
 4/day
13th 
Bonus feat, trap sense +5
14th 
—
15th 
Augury
 5/day, blindsense 3/day
16th 
Bonus feat, trap sense +6
17th 
—
18th 
Augury
 6/day
19th 
Bonus feat, trap sense +7
20th 
Blindsense 4/day
EPIC FEATS
The feats below are available only to epic-level charac
-
ters—that is, characters of at least 21st level. The versions 
of these feats presented here supersede any previously 
published versions of feats with the same name.
Augmented Alchemy [Epic]
You can create alchemical items and substances that are 
much more powerful than normal.
 
Prerequisites:
 Int 21, Craft (alchemy) 24 ranks.
 
Benefit:
  Whenever  creating  an  alchemical  item  or 
substance  (not  including  poisons),  you  can  choose  to 
make it more powerful than normal by adding 20 to the 
DC required to create it and multiplying its price by 5.
  An  augmented  alchemical  item  or  substance  deals 
double normal damage (if it deals damage), has twice the 
normal duration (if it has a duration), adds 2 to the save DC 
(if it has a save DC), and affects an area twice as wide as 
normal (if it has an area). If the item or substance doesn’t 
fit any of these categories, then it cannot be affected by 
this feat.
  For example, an augmented flask of alchemist’s fire 
deals 2d6 points of damage (or 2 points of splash damage 
to all targets within 10 feet) and burns for 2 additional 
rounds after striking the target (rather than 1). The save 
DC to extinguish the flames is 17.
Epic Dodge [Epic]
You are able to evade attacks with exceptional agility.
 
Prerequisites:
  Dex  25,  Tumble  Dodge,  30  ranks, 
defensive roll, improved evasion.
 
Benefit:
 Once per round, when struck by an attack 
from an opponent you have designated as the target of 
your Dodge feat, you automatically avoid all damage from 
the attack. 
Epic Reputation [Epic]
Your reputation provides great bonuses on interactions 
with others.
 
Benefit:
 You gain a +4 bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, 
Gather Information, Intimidate, and Perform checks.
Epic Skill Focus [Epic]
Choose a skill, such as Move Silently. You have a legend
-
ary knack with that skill.
 
Prerequisite:
 20 ranks in the skill selected.
 
Benefit:
 You gain a +10 bonus on all skill checks with 
the selected skill.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
BEHIND THE CURTAIN: EPIC LEVELS AND 
PRESTIGE CLASSES
The epic rules allow you to go beyond the normal level limit in a 
prestige class, but only if it is a ten-level class. Why can’t you add 
levels to a prestige class with fewer than ten levels?
 
It’s Too Easy:
  Maxing  out  a  ten-level  prestige  class  takes  a 
lot of time and effort, detracting significantly from your pursuit 
of the core classes. Even after maxing out a prestige class with 
only five levels, for instance, you haven’t taken more than a short 
detour from your main class or classes.
 
It’s Not Significant Enough:
 Characters with ten levels in the 
assassin prestige class undoubtedly think of themselves as as
-
sassins, regardless of the fact that they also have ten levels in 
one or more other classes. If you’ve taken fewer than ten levels 
in a prestige class, those levels represent a smaller fraction of 
your character’s identity.
 
It’s Hard to Build an Epic Progression:
 With only a few levels 
to guide you, it’s hard to determine what an appropriate progres
-
sion of class features would be for the class. The rate of improve
-
ment of a special ability might be too fast to extrapolate over an 
infinite number of levels, or there might simply be too few class 
features to build a unique epic progression. 
   That said, if your DM wants to allow a character to gain epic levels 
in a prestige class with fewer than ten levels in its progression, that’s 
okay. Work together with your DM to create an epic progression for 
the class (see the Behind the Curtain: Building an Epic Progression 
sidebar, page 210 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
).
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs


192
CHAPTER 6
ORGANIZATIONS
 
 
Special:
  You  can  gain  this  feat  multiple  times.  Its 
effects do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies 
to a different skill.
 
Special:
 This feat counts as Skill Focus for the purpose 
of qualifying for other feats, prestige classes, and the 
like.
Group Inspiration [Epic]
Your  bardic  powers  can  inspire  more  allies  than 
normal.
 
Prerequisites:
 Perform 30 ranks, bardic music.
 
Benefit:
  The  number  of  allies  you  can  affect  with 
your inspire competence, inspire greatness, or inspire 
heroics ability doubles. When inspiring competence in 
multiple allies, you can choose different skills to inspire 
for different allies.
Improved Skirmish [Epic]
Your combat mobility improves.
 
Prerequisites:
 Skirmish +4d6/+4 AC.
 
Benefit:
 If the bonus to AC granted when you use your 
skirmish ability is equal to or higher than the number of 
dice of extra damage granted by your skirmish ability, your 
extra damage on skirmish attacks increases by 1d6.
  If the bonus to AC granted by your skirmish ability is 
less than the number of dice of extra damage granted by 
your skirmish ability, the bonus to AC when skirmishing 
increases by 1 instead.
 
Special:
 This feat may be taken multiple times. Its 
effects stack.
Improved Sudden Strike [Epic]
Your ability to strike unaware foes improves.
 
Prerequisites:
 Sudden strike +8d6.
 
Benefit:
 Add 1d6 to your sudden strike damage.
 
Special:
 This feat may be taken multiple times. Its 
effects stack.
Legendary Acrobat [Epic]
You can balance and tumble much more easily than a 
normal person.
 
Prerequisites:
 Dex 21, Balance 24 ranks, Tumble 24 
ranks.
 
Benefit:
 You can ignore any check penalties applied 
for accelerated movement while balancing (see page 67 
of the 
Player’s Handbook
), for accelerated tumbling (see 
page 84 of the 
Player’s Handbook
), or for running while 
balancing on a narrow surface or while tumbling (see 
pages 97 and 103 in this book).
 
Normal:
 Without this feat, you take a –5 penalty on 
Balance checks and a –10 penalty on Tumble checks 
when  attempting  to  move  your  full  speed  as  a  move 
action, or a –20 penalty on Balance or Tumble checks 
when attempting to run while balancing on a narrow 
surface or while tumbling.
Legendary Climber [Epic]
You can climb rapidly much more easily than a normal 
person.
 
Prerequisites:
 Dex 21, Balance 12 ranks, Climb 24 
ranks.
 
Benefit:
 You can ignore any check penalties applied for 
accelerated climbing (see page 69 of the 
Player’s Handbook
), 
rapid climbing, or combat climbing (see page 97
).
 
Normal:
 Without this feat, you take a –5 penalty on 
Climb checks when attempting to climb half your speed 
as a move action, or a –20 penalty when attempting to 
climb your speed as a move action or to retain your Dex 
bonus to AC when climbing.
Legendary Leaper [Epic]
You can cover great distances with only a brief start.
 
Prerequisite:
 Jump 24 ranks.
 
Benefit:
 You need only move 5 feet in a straight line 
to make a running jump.
Legendary Tracker [Epic]
You can track prey across or through the water, or even 
through the air.
 
Prerequisites:
 Wis 25, Knowledge (nature) 30 ranks, 
Survival 30 ranks, Track.
 
Benefit:
 You can track creatures across water, under
-
water, or through the air by the minute disturbances they 
make and traces of their passage. This benefit adds the 
surfaces of water, underwater, and air to the list of surfaces 
found under the Track feat in the 
Player’s Handbook
:
Surface 
DC
Water 
60
Underwater 
80
Air 
120
Polyglot [Epic]
You can speak, read, and write all languages.
 
Prerequisites:
  Int  25,  Speak  Language  (five  lan
-
guages).
 
Benefit:
 You can speak all languages. If you are literate, 
you can also read and write all languages (not including 
magical script).




1
SECRETS OF THE
FOCHLUCAN
COLLEGE
A Web Enhancement Adventure
Site for 
Complete Adventurer
CREDITS
Design:
Skip Williams
Based on a Concept by:
Rich Baker
Editing:
Penny Williams
Typesetting:
Nancy Walker
Cartography
:
Dennis Kauth and Rob Lazzaretti
Web Production
Julia Martin
Web Development:
Mark A. Jindra
Graphic Design:
Sean Glenn, Cynthia Fliege
Based  on  the  original  D
UNGEONS
&  D
RAGONS
®
game  by  E.
Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson and on the new edition of the
D
UNGEONS
&  D
RAGONS
game  designed  by  Jonathan  Tweet,
Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Rich Baker, and Peter Adkison.
D&D,  D
UNGEONS
&  D
RAGONS
,  and  D
UNGEON
M
ASTER
are  registered  trademarks  owned
by  Wizards  of  the  Coast,  Inc.  The  d20  logo  is  a  trademark  owned  by  Wizards  of  the
Coast,  Inc.  All  Wizards  characters,  character  names,  and  the  distinctive  likenesses
thereof are trademarks owned by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United
States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the
material or artwork contained herein is prohibited 
without the express written permission of 
Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
©2005 Wizards of the Coast, Inc., a subsidiary of Hasbro, Inc.
All rights reserved. 
Made in the U.S.A. 
This product is a work of fiction. 
Any similarity to actual people, organizations, places, 
or events is purely coincidental.
This Wizards of the Coast game product contains no Open Game Content. 
No portion of this work may be reproduced in any form without 
written permission. To learn more about the Open Gaming License 
and the d20 System License, 
please visit www
.wizards.com/d20
.
For more D
UNGEONS
& D
RAGONS
articles, adventures, and information, 
visit 
www
.wizards.com/dnd
Complete  Adventurer
offers  a  wealth  of  new  spells,  pres-
tige classes, feats, and magic items for bards and rogues.
According  to  a  sidebar  in  the  description  of  the
Fochlucan  lyrist  prestige  class,  a  college  for  bards  is
located on the shores of Loch Firrnen, a few miles from
the town of Oakenway. This adventure site details that
haven of peaceful study.
Secrets of the Fochlucan College
is an adventure site that
can be dropped into any area that has a large, clear lake.
A  variety  of  adventures  can  take  place  here,  since
outsiders  frequently  infiltrate  the  college  to  search  for
its  secrets.  As  always,  feel  free  to  adapt  the  material
presented here as you see fit to make it work with your
campaign.
PREPARATION
You  (the  DM)  need  the  D&D  core  rulebooks—the
Player’s  Handbook,
the 
Dungeon  Master’s  Guide,  
and  the
Monster  Manual
—as  well  as  
Complete  Adventurer—
to  use
this  adventure  site.  The  information  presented  here
utilizes the D&D v.3.5 rules. 
To get started, print out the adventure site, including
the  map.  Read  through  it  at  least  once  to  familiarize
yourself  with  the  situation,  site,  and  major  NPCs
(particularly  their  motivations).  You  must  decide  what
kind  of  action  takes  place—whether  the  PCs  simply
stumble upon the site or have a reason to visit. Monster
and  NPC  statistics  are  provided  with  each  encounter
area in abbreviated form.
BACKGROUND
Visitors to the famous (or as some would say, infamous)
Fochlucan  College  often  come  away  disappointed.
Given  the  reputation  the  Fochlucan  masters  have
gained for international intrigue, most travelers expect
to find a bustling citadel of learning that is also a bastion
of  military  strength—with  furnishings  and  a  treasury
to  match.  Instead,  they  find  a  sleepy  country  retreat
where a handful of distracted scholars study the minu-
tia  of  the  past,  without  so  much  as  an  armed  guard  in
sight.  Thanks  to  a  hardworking  staff  of  servants,  the
whole building is spotless, but the age of its furnishings
is obvious. Detractors might call the place threadbare or
shabby,  but  it  has  a  comfortable,  lived-in  look.  In  fact,
the college looks much like a rural manor belonging to
an  impoverished  noble  family  whose  members  have
long been accustomed to empty coffers.
The  college’s  worn  appearance  reflects  the  building’s
true  role  as  a  meeting  place  for  energetic  people  who
occasionally need a place to rest or confer with colleagues.


2
The Fochlucan masters obviously place a higher value on
deeds and ideas than on brick and mortar.
Over the years, the countless burglars and spies who
have  infiltrated  the  college  have  all  but  gone  mad
searching for secret documents, vast treasures, or both.
These  invaders  inevitably  fail,  because  the  biggest
secret  of  the  Fochlucan  College  is  that  it  holds  no
secrets  at  all.  Still,  it  remains  a  place  of  mystery  in  the
popular    imagination—a    misconception    that    the
Fochlucan masters take no pains to correct.
THE FOCHLUCAN
COLLEGE
As noted on page 49 of 
Complete Adventurer,
the college
is  located  on  the  shore  of  Loch  Firrnen,  a  few  miles
from the town of Oakenway. Thick woods surround the
lake  and  the  building,  separating  them  from  the  town.
Visitors  can  hike  through  the  woods  to  the  lake  and
then travel by water to the college, but an overland trip
generally proves easier and is certainly more direct.
No signposts point the way to the college, but a well-
used  road  connecting  Oakenway  to  nearby  communi-
ties passes fairly near the place, and a meandering path
connects  a  loop  in  that  road  with  the  college.  Most
casual travelers overlook the connecting path because it
looks like a simple woodcutter’s lane or game trail. The
Fochlucan masters make no special effort to conceal the
college’s  location,  however,  and  most  residents  of
Oakenway know the route.
FEATURES
The  college  is  a  two-story  stone  structure  with  a  slate
roof.  A  thick  layer  of  climbing  ivy  covers  its  ancient
walls. 
Unless  otherwise  stated  in  the  description  of  a
specific area, the college’s major features are as follows.
Walls
The  exterior  walls  are  stone.  The  surface  has  begun  to
crumble, and the clinging ivy makes climbing particu-
larly difficult because the vines tend to tear away under
a load. Thus, the DC for any Move Silently checks made
while climbing an exterior wall increases by +5.
s
s
Ivy- Covered  Wall:
3  ft.  thick;  hardness  8;  hp
270; Break DC 39; Climb DC 25.
The  interior  walls  are  also  made  of  stone.  The
surfaces are covered with smooth plaster.
s
s
Interior  Wall:
1  ft.  thick;  hardness  8;  hp  90;
Break DC 35; Climb DC 20.
Ceilings
Unless otherwise noted, ceilings are 15 feet high on the
ground floor and 10 feet high on the upper floor.
Floors
The  floors  on  the  ground  floor  are  made  of  smooth,
fitted  stones.  The  upper  level  has  wooden  floors.  Rugs
or  carpets  cover  most  of  the  floor  area,  but  a  few
sections  are  bare,  as  noted  in  the  individual  room
descriptions.
Doors
The  exterior  doors  are  made  of  reinforced  wood.
Though  all  of  them  are  equipped  with  locks,  they  are
kept  unlocked  unless  a  particular  threat  necessitates
extra security. 
s
s
Strong Wooden Door:
2 in. thick; hardness 5;
hp 20; Break DC 25; Open Lock DC 20.
The  interior  doors  are  carved  from  simple  wood.
Most  of  them  don’t  have  locks,  but  those  granting
access to sleeping rooms and guest quarters do, as noted
in  the  area  descriptions.  Interior  doors  aren’t  locked
unless noted otherwise in an area description. 
s
s
Simple Wooden Door:
1 in. thick; hardness 5;
hp 10; Break DC 15; Open Lock DC 20.
Colver  (the  major  domo;  see  Servant’s  Room)  and
Noelin  (the  resident  Yew  Master;  see  Yew  Master’s
Room) each have a set of master keys for all the doors in
the college.
Fireplaces
The college is equipped with several fireplaces for heat-
ing  and  cooking.  The  building’s  stone  construction
ensures that it remains cool and slightly damp even on
hot days, so a small fire is usually kept burning in every
fireplace.
A typical fireplace at the Fochlucan College measures
about 5 feet high, 2 feet deep, and 5 feet wide. The chim-
ney  is  about  a  foot  square  and  25  to  50  feet  tall.  (The
longer chimneys begin on the ground floor.) A ceramic
cap  and  copper  grate  at  the  top  keep  out  the  rain  and
snow out and also prevent forest animals from entering.
A  Diminutive  or  smaller  creature  could  climb  inside  a
chimney,  but  only  if  it  entered  via  a  fireplace  or  broke
through  the  grate  at  the  top.  A  Tiny  creature  could
enter  a  chimney  the  same  way,  but  it  would  have  to
squeeze in (see page 148 in the 
Player’s Handbook
).
The outside of a chimney has a Climb DC of 25 (the
same as an exterior wall), and the inside has a Climb DC
of  10.  However,  the  exterior  is  hot  and  smoky,  and  it
tends  to  stay  that  way  for  about  an  hour  even  if  all  the
fires in the fireplaces connected to it are extinguished.


3


A creature climbing inside a chimney takes 1d4 points
of  fire  damage  each  round  from  the  hot  surfaces  and
also suffers the effects of heavy smoke (see page 304 in
the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide
).
s
s
Chimney Grate: 
1 in. thick; hardness 10; hp 30;
Break DC 26.
Windows
Every  window  is  fitted  with  crystal-clear,  leaded  glass
and a pair of simple wooden shutters. The windows are
occasionally  opened  for  ventilation,  but  they  can  be
closed and latched to keep them from blowing open in
severe weather. Likewise, the inhabitants can close and
bar  the  shutters  to  keep  the  building  snug  in  bad
weather. Normally the windows are kept closed but not
latched, and the shutters remain open.
s
s
Wooden  Shutters:
1  in.  thick;  hardness  5;  hp
10; Break DC 13 (15 if barred).
s
s
Glass Window Pane:
1/4 in. thick; hardness 1;
hp 1; Break DC 5.
Light
Any  room  with  a  window  has  at  least  shadowy  illumi-
nation  (see  page  165  in  the  
Player’s  Handbook
)  during
daylight hours. Some areas are more brightly lit because
they have extra windows or an artificial light source, as
noted in the individual room descriptions.
GROUNDS
The grounds occupy about 40 acres on the south shore
of  Loch  Firrnen,  and  the  college  itself  stands  about  10
yards   from   the   water’s   edge.   Scattered   hardwood
trees—mostly  stately  oaks,  beeches,  and  assorted  fruit
and  nut  trees—grow  throughout  most  of  the  grounds,
providing a parklike atmosphere. Tall grass and a profu-
sion of wildflowers cover the ground under the trees.
Creatures:
A herd of goats keeps the groundcover
cropped  fairly  close.  The  animals  belong  to  a  tribe  of
centaurs  that  helps  to  defend  the  college  when  neces-
sary.  Visitors  to  the  college  might  spot  a  few  centaurs
and goats roaming the grounds during daylight hours.
D
D
Centaurs (5-8): 
hp 26 each; see 
Monster Manual,
page 32.
Tactics:
The  centaurs  tend  to  keep  their  distance
from strangers, but they allow newcomers to approach
if  greeted  in  a  friendly  and  nonthreatening  manner.
The  centaurs  are  mostly  concerned  with  tending  their
goats  and  they  respect  the  privacy  of  the  masters,  so
they  don’t  answer  any  probing  questions  about  them-
selves  or  about  the  college.  They  tend  to  steer  any
conversation  toward  fairly  light  topics,  such  as  the
weather or local events.
In  a  fight,  the  centaurs  usually  begin  by  pressing
close  to  their  foes  and  attacking  with  hooves  and
swords.  They  use  their  superior  speed  to  set  up  flank
attacks and maneuver around the enemy’s the front line
so that they can attack the more vulnerable opponents,
such  as  spellcasters.  If  a  foe  proves  too  tough  to  defeat
with  melee  attacks,  the  centaurs  use  the  withdraw
action  to  scatter  in  all  directions.  When  they’re  safely
away, they use their bows to discourage pursuit.
GROUND FLOOR
Most  visitors  to  the  college  don’t  get  past  the  ground
floor.  The  upper  level  is  reserved  for  the  Fochlucan
masters’ business.
The following sections offer short descriptions of the
college’s  major  ground-level  areas,  both  indoors  and
out.  The  area  names  correspond  to  the  map  shown  on
page  50  of  The  Complete  
Adventurer, 
which  is  repro-
duced  here  for  convenience.  For  ease  of  reference,  the
area descriptions are presented in alphabetical order.
Banquet Hall
The  double  doors  leading  into  this  room  have  shiny
brass  fittings.  Carvings  on  the  polished  wooden
surfaces  depict  lute  players  strumming  their  instru-
ments.  Read  or  paraphrase  the  following  when  the
PCs enter.
The  windows  in  this  chamber  provide  ample  light
when  the  sun  shines.  At  night,  two  brass  candelabras,
each bearing a permanent 
daylight
spell, provide illumi-
nation. The candelabras are kept in the lower part of the
sideboard,  along  with  an  assortment  of  flatware  and
serving dishes made of porcelain, wood, and pewter.
The  Fochlucan  masters  use  this  room  to  entertain
important  guests  and  to  hold  conferences.  Members  of
the  Yew  Circle  (see  page  49  in  the  
Complete  Adventurer
)
meet  here  several  times  a  year  to  discuss  college  busi-
ness and to decide the course of the college’s activities in
the political and diplomatic arenas.
Treasure:
The crockery, flatware, and serving dishes
are  worth  a  total  of  1,000  gp,  but  the  whole  collection
The floor of this magnificent chamber is tiled with
smooth,  buff-colored  marble.  A  mahogany  table
about  25  feet  long  and  nearly  8  feet  wide  fills  the
room’s center. Matching chairs surround the table
and  also  line  the  wall  under  the  windows  to  the
north.  Against  the  south  wall,  just  the  left  of  the
double  doors,  stands  a  massive  sideboard  with  a
hutch displaying a collection of fine crockery.
4


5
weighs  300  lbs.  The  flatware  alone  is  worth  350  gp  and
weighs only 20 lbs. The most valuable item in this room,
however, is the banquet table, which is a magic item.
Table of Seclusion:
The Fochlucan masters created this
unique item to ensure that their deliberations remained
private.  The  great  mahogany  table  can  produce  a
Mordenkainen’s private sanctum
effect on command once
per  day.  All  members  of  the  Yew  Circle  know  the
command word.
Moderate  abjuration;  CL  9th;  Craft  Wondrous  Item,
Mordenkainen’s private sanctum;
Price 16,200 gp.
Cloakroom
This  room  serves  as  a  holding  area  for  visitors’  cloaks,
hats, boots, and other outerwear. Shelves and pegs line
the  walls,  and  a  rack  for  hanging  wet  clothing  runs
down the center. 
Usually,  the  shelves  and  pegs  hold  no  more  than  a
few  travel-stained  garments,  but  when  a  banquet  or
meeting  is  in  progress,  the  room  is  packed  with  gear.
On  such  occasions,  both  doors  are  kept  locked  and  an
alarm
spell is placed in the room for extra security. The
passkeys  that  Colver  and  the  masters  carry  (see  the
Features section) fit these doors. 
Dock
This  simple  wooden  pier  runs  about  a  foot  above  the
surface of Loch Firrnen. Visitors and residents alike can
tie up rowboats here, or sit and enjoy nature, or even fish
or swim. The lake is only about 4 feet deep at the end of
the pier, so jumping off is much safer than diving.
Front Hall (EL 14)
A flight of stone steps rises about 5 feet to the college’s
oak front door. Read or paraphrase the following when
the PCs arrive.
First-time visitors to the college often don’t know what
to make of this imposing chamber.
The  mosaic  pattern  on  the  floor  traces  an  elaborate
labyrinth that follows a path from the front door to the
room’s  center.  This  design  represents  the  Fochlucan
College’s  role  in  the  world,  which  is  to  navigate  the
“labyrinth” of politics and diplomacy to reach a desired
end.  Exactly  what  that  end  might  be,  the  Fochlucan
masters aren’t saying—at least not yet.
The  tapestries  lavishly  illustrate  a  folktale  involving
twin brothers who are rivals for a lady’s hand. Literally
hundreds of detailed scenes from the familiar story are
pictured.
A  pair  of  
everburning  torches,
one  at  the  foot  of  each
staircase leading to the second floor, provide additional
illumination.
Creatures:
At  almost  any  hour,  a  few  students  are
busily studying the tapestries in this chamber. The tale
they illustrate is the subject of many popular poems and
songs, and a bard who has studied them gains some new
insights into those works. Also, some of the Fochlucan
masters  find  that  the  tapestries  serve  as  an  excellent
textbook for teaching a variety of subjects, from human
folklore  to  observation  and  memory.  Consequently,
their  students  spend  a  great  of  time  in  here  trying  to
take in all the details.
A  door  warden—typically  a  junior  member  of  the
college  staff—is  posted  in  this  chamber  at  all  hours  to
greet visitors and generally keep an eye on the situation.
D
D
Students (0-5): 
Male or female bard 1 to bard 6;
see  the  sample  NPC  statistics  in  Chapter  4  of  the
Dungeon Master’s Guide.
D
D
Warden  (1):
Almost  any  character  might  be  on
duty here, but the warden usually is a Fochlucan lyrist.
Use  the  statistics  for  Tyrea  Neylis  on  pages  48-49  of
Complete Adventurer
for a warden.
Tactics:
The warden greets everyone who enters the
hall.  Visitors  who  don’t  have  legitimate  business  at  the
college are asked to leave. Unruly or violent visitors are
expelled as quickly as possible, usually through the use
of  an  enchantment  spell  or  bardic  music  ability.  Any
students in the hall help the warden as best they can.
Gazebo (EL 13)
The Fochlucans use the gazebo for impromptu concerts
and  get-togethers,  though  from  time  to  time  a  solitary
student  or  master  can  be  found  relaxing  here.  Read  or
paraphrase  the  following  when  the  PCs  approach  the
gazebo.
This wooden structure has open sides and a conical
roof  topped  with  shiny  black  slates.  The  wooden
parts  are  painted  white  and  decorated  with  vine
and  leaf  motifs.  The  plants  in  the  beds  of  flowers
that ring the gazebo bloom in a riot of color.
A  built-in  wooden  bench  rings  the  interior  of
the  gazebo,  and  a  second  round  bench  occupies
the center.
An intricate mosaic in black and white covers the
floor  of  this  great  chamber.  The  pattern  appears
random  and  seems  to  induce  a  feeling  of  vertigo.
The chamber is open all the way to the roof some
25  feet  above,  and  rich  but  ancient  tapestries  line
the  walls  from  the  floor  to  the  lofty  ceiling.  The
chamber also has a pair of south-facing windows. 


6
The assortment of flowers has been carefully selected to
provide blossoms through most of the year.
Creatures:
One  Fochlucan  has  made  the  gazebo
her  permanent  quarters.  Elibroviel  the  pixie  grew  up
near  the  college  and  spent  her  youth  bedeviling  its
students  and  masters.  Having  absorbed  much  of  their
knowledge  over  the  years,  she  eventually  decided  to
become an adventurer. These days, she functions as the
college’s unofficial sergeant-at-arms and its chief liaison
to the sylvan creatures living near Loch Firrnen.
D
D
Elibroviel:
Female pixie rogue 4/druid 2/bard
3/Fochlucan lyrist 2; CR 14; Small fey; HD 10d6 plus
2d8; hp 44; Init +4; Spd 20 ft., fly 60 ft. (good); AC 21,
touch 17, flat-footed 21; Base Atk +8; Grp +1; Atk +14
melee (1d4–3/19–20, masterwork short sword) or +14
ranged  (1d6–2/[TS]3,  
+1  longbow
);  Full  Atk  +14/+9
melee  (1d4–3/19–20,  masterwork  short  sword)  or
+14/+9  ranged  (1d6–2/[TS]3,  
+1  longbow
);  SA  sneak
attack  +2d6,  special  arrows,  spell-like  abilities;  SQ
animal companion (Gawyn; link, share spells), bardic
knowledge  +7,  bardic  music  (countersong,  
fascinate,
inspire   competence   +1,   inspire   courage)   5/day,
damage reduction 10/cold iron, evasion, greater invis-
ibility, low-light vision, nature sense, spell resistance
26,  trap  sense  +1,  trapfinding,  unbound,  uncanny
dodge,  wild  empathy  +8,  woodland  stride;  AL  NG;  
SV  Fort  +5,  Ref  +16,  Will  +15;  Str  5,  Dex  19,  Con  11,
Int 14, Wis 17, Cha 22.
Skills and Feats:
Bluff +10, Concentration +8, Decipher
Script  +9,  Diplomacy  +13,  Escape  Artist  +8,  Gather
Information  +13,  Hide  +16,  Jump  –9,  Knowledge
(nature) +15, Listen +11, Move Silently +11, Open Lock
+9, Perform (stringed instrument) +23, Ride +8, Search
+8,  Sense  Motive  +7,  Sleight  of  Hand  +11,  Speak
Language  (Druidic),  Spot  +9,  Survival  +12,  Use  Magic
Device +7; Combat Reflexes, Dodge
B
, Lingering Song*,
Mobility, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse.
* New feat from 
Complete Adventurer.
Languages: 
Aquan, Common, Druidic, Elven, Sylvan.
Sneak  Attack  (Ex):
Elibroviel  deals  2d6  extra
points of damage on any successful attack against flat-
footed  or  flanked  targets,  or  against  a  target  that  has
been  denied  its  Dexterity  bonus  for  any  reason.  This
damage  also  applies  to  ranged  attacks  against  targets
up to 30 feet away. Creatures with concealment, crea-
tures  without  discernible  anatomies,  and  creatures
immune  to  extra  damage  from  critical  hits  are  all
immune  to  sneak  attacks.  Elibroviel  may  choose  to
deliver  nonlethal  damage  with  her  sneak  attack,  but
only when using a weapon designed for that purpose,
such as a sap (blackjack).
Special  Arrows:
Elibroviel  carries  2  arrows  that
deal no damage but cause sleep. Any opponent, regard-
less  of  Hit  Dice,  that  is  struck  by  one  of  these  arrows
must succeed on a DC 18 Fortitude save or be affected
as though by a 
sleep
spell.
Spell-Like  Abilities:
1/day—
lesser  confusion
(DC
17), 
dancing lights, detect chaos, detect good, detect evil, detect
law, detect thoughts
(DC 18), 
dispel magic, entangle
(DC 17),
Otto’s  irresistible  dance,  permanent  image
(DC  22;  visual
and  auditory  elements  only),  
polymorph
(self  only).
Caster level 8th.
Animal Companion (Ex):
Elibroviel has a hawk
named Gawyn as an animal companion. 
Gawyn:
Male hawk companion; CR —; Tiny
animal; HD 1d8; hp 4; Init +3; Spd 10 ft., fly 60
ft.  (average);  AC  17,  touch  15,  flat-footed  14;
Base Atk +0; Grp –10; Atk or Full Atk +5 melee
(1d4–2, talons); Space/Reach 2-1/2 ft./0 ft.; SQ
low-light  vision,  tricks  (assist  attack*,  attack,
guard, home*, hunt, seek, steal); AL N; SV Fort
+2, Ref +5, Will +2; Str 6, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 2,
Wis 14, Cha 6.  
Skills and Feats:
Hide +11, Jump –14, Spot +14;
Weapon Finesse.
* New trick from 
Complete Adventurer.
Animal  Companion  Benefits  (Ex):
Elibroviel
and  Gawyn  enjoy  the  link  and  share  spells  special
qualities. 
Link  (Ex):
Elibroviel  can  handle  Gawyn  as  a  free
action.  She  also  gains  a  +4  circumstance  bonus  on  all
wild empathy checks and Handle Animal checks made
regarding Gawyn. 
Share  Spells  (Ex):  
Elibroviel  may  have  any  spell  she
casts on herself also affect Gawyn if the latter is within
5 feet at the time. Elibroviel may also cast a spell with a
target of “You” on Gawyn.
Bardic Music:
Elibroviel can use bardic music five
times per day. See the bard class features on page 29 of
the 
Player’s Handbook.
Countersong  (Su):
Elibroviel  can  use  music  or  poetics
to counter magical effects that depend on sound. 
Fascinate (Sp):
Elibroviel can use music or poetics to
cause  one  or  more  creatures  to  become  fascinated
with her. 
Inspire  Competence  (Su):
Elibroviel  can  use  music  or
poetics to help an ally succeed at a task. 
Inspire Courage (Su):
Elibroviel can use music or poet-
ics  to  bolster  her  allies  against  fear  and  improve  their
combat abilities.


7
Evasion (Ex):
If Elibroviel is exposed to any effect
that  normally  allows  her  to  attempt  a  Reflex  saving
throw  for  half  damage,  she  takes  no  damage  with  a
successful saving throw.
Greater  Invisibility  (Su):
Elibroviel  remains
invisible even when she attacks. This ability is constant,
but Elibroviel can suppress or resume it as a free action.
Trapfinding  (Ex):
Elibroviel  can  find,  disarm,  or
bypass traps with a DC of 20 or higher. She can use the
Search  skill  to  find,  and  the  Disable  Device  skill  to
disarm, magic traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used
to  create  it).  If  her  Disable  Device  result  exceeds  the
trap’s  DC  by  10  or  more,  she  discovers  how  to  bypass
the trap without triggering or disarming it.
Unbound:
Elibroviel’s   druid   oaths   have   been
relaxed, allowing her to wear light metal armor with no
loss  of  spellcasting,  supernatural,  or  spell-like  abilities.
She  also  suffers  no  experience  point  penalty  for  multi-
classing.
Uncanny  Dodge  (Ex):
Elibroviel  retains  her
Dexterity  bonus  to  Armor  Class  even  when  flat-footed
or  targeted  by  an  unseen  foe  (she  still  loses  her
Dexterity bonus if paralyzed or otherwise immobile).
Woodland  Stride  (Ex):
Elibroviel  may  move
through  natural  thorns,  briars,  overgrown  areas,  and
similar terrain at her normal speed and without damage
or other impairment. However, thorns, briars, and over-
grown  areas  that  are  magically  manipulated  to  impede
motion still affect her.
Bard  Spells  Known
(3/5/3  per  day;  caster  level  5th):
0—
dancing lights, detect magic, ghost sound
(DC 16), 
mage
hand,  open/close,  summon  instrument*;
1st—
grease
(DC
17), 
sleep
(DC  17),  
unseen  servant,  ventriloquism;
2nd—
hold person
(DC 18), 
see invisibility, summon swarm.
* New spell from 
Complete Adventurer.
Druid  Spells  Prepared
(caster  level  4th):  0—
cure  minor
wounds
(2), 
guidance,  resistance,  virtue;
1st—
cure  light
wounds, faerie fire, produce flame
(+11 melee touch or +11
ranged touch), 
speak with animals;
2nd—
chill metal
(DC
15), 
flaming sphere
(DC 15), 
warp wood 
(DC 15). 
Possessions:  Bracers  of  armor  +3,  ring  of  protection  +2,
masterwork short sword, +1 longbow
with 18 arrows, 2 
sleep
arrows,  ring  of  the  ram,  cloak  of  Charisma  +2,  Heward’s
handy  haversack,  potion  of  cure  moderate  wounds,  potion  of
shield  of  faith  
+3, 
potion  of  magic  fang,  potion  of  protection
from evil,
masterwork lute, amethyst (10 gp).
Tactics:
Elibroviel  doesn’t  like  to  confront  foes
directly;  she  prefers  to  embarrass  or  bedevil  them—
perhaps  by  snatching  items  with  her  Sleight  of  Hand
skill  or  by  creating  a  silly  illusion,  such  as  a  crying
dragon  alighting  on  the  gazebo’s  roof.  In  a  fight,
Elibroviel quickly uses her 
Otto’s irresistible dance
ability
on  the  most  dangerous-looking  foe,  then  backs  off  to
cast  spells  and  use  bardic  music.  If  forced  into  melee,
she defends herself with 
produce flame
or with her 
ring of
the ram.
Development:
Elibroviel  keeps  her  eyes  and  ears
open  for  trouble,  and  she  usually  notices  any  unusual
events  at  the  college  after  a  round  or  two.  She  quickly
flies off to join any combat she discovers.
Guest House (EL 9, 10, or 11)
A  half  dozen  of  these  small  buildings  stand  on  the
college grounds; the one shown on the map is a typical
example.  Like  the  college,  they  have  slate  roofs  and
stone walls covered in climbing ivy. Unlike the college,
each  guest  house  is  only  one  story  tall.  The  interior
consists  of  a  sitting  room  and  a  sleeping  room  (shown
on the map as a guest room). 
The sitting room is furnished with a divan and a few
armchairs,  plus  a  writing  desk.  The  sleeping  room  has
two  or  three  beds,  each  with  a  small  trunk  for  storing
personal  gear  at  its  foot.  One  or  two  wardrobes  and
chests  of  drawers  for  storing  clothing  round  out  the
furnishings.
Anyone staying in a guest house is given a key to its
door.
Creatures:
The  Fochlucan  masters  have  wide
interests  and  many  friends,  so  a  guest  house  may  host
almost  any  kind  of  visitor.  Lillends  visit  the  college
often  because  they’re  drawn  to  the  tapestries  in  the
front  hall  and  the  delightful  music  that  the  bards
produce.  Thus,  a  few  lillends  generally  occupy  one  or
two of the guest houses at any given time. The majority
of the houses, however, are empty unless a major event
is occurring at the college.
D
D
Lillends  (2-4):
hp  45  each,  see  
Monster  Manual,
page 168.
Tactics:
The  lillends  aren’t  aggressive  or  prone  to
attack,  but  they  defend  the  college  and  its  members
when  necessary.  In  a  fight,  they  often  use  
hold  person
spells on the most belligerent foes. If the spell works, the
lillends  try  to  negotiate  with  the  remaining  opponents.
Otherwise,  one  lillend  attacks  the  most  belligerent  foe
with  melee  or  ranged  weapons  while  her  companions
cast more spells or use bardic music abilities.
Guest Room
This  room  houses  visitors  who  aren’t  staying  long
enough  to  merit  opening  a  guest  house.  It’s  usually
empty.
In appearance, the room is similar to a guest house. It
is  furnished  with  four  comfortable  beds  (each  with  a


8
storage  trunk  at  its  foot),  plus  two  wardrobes,  two
chests of drawers, and four small writing desks.
Kitchen (EL 2)
This  chamber  usually  smells  of  fragrant  herbs,  fresh
bread, hearty stew, or all three. Read or paraphrase the
following when the PCs arrive.
All the college’s meals are prepared here, and most are
served  here  as  well.  The  banquet  hall  is  used  only  for
very large gatherings.
Creatures:
The kitchen is empty in the middle of the
night. At all other times, three or four servants are at work
here, either preparing a meal or cleaning up after one.
Cooks  (3–4):
Male  or  female  human  or  half-elf
commoner 2; hp 7.
Tactics:
The cooks have no stomach for fighting. If
attacked, they flee out one of the doors or up the stairs.
Library (EL 14)
This  chamber  is  one  of  the  most  frequented  rooms  at
the college.
The numerous windows admit plenty of daylight. Six 8-
foot-tell, freestanding brass candlesticks that bear 
contin-
ual flame
spells (caster level 9th) add to the illumination.
The  library  contains  several  thousand  books.  The
exact  composition  of  the  collection  varies  over  time  as
students, masters, and visiting scholars borrow volumes
of  interest  and  later  return  them.  The  Fochlucan
masters also write a few books of their own.
Creatures: 
One  of  the  college  librarians  and  a
handful  of  students  are  here  at  all  hours.  (See  the
Creatures  section  of  the  Front  Hall  description  for
details.) Two librarians are present at the college at any
given  time,  and  the  Fochlucans  count  nearly  a  dozen
among their members. All are familiar with the collec-
tion  and  with  books  in  general.  The  absent  librarians
spend  much  of  their  time  acquiring  or  writing  new
books for the collection.
Loch Firrnen (EL 5, 6, 7, or 8)
The clear water of the loch teems with fish. The shore-
line  is  rather  marshy,  and  the  loch  remains  fairly  shal-
low  (about  4  feet  deep)  for  about  a  hundred  yards  out
from  it.  Clumps  of  cattails  grow  in  profusion  in  the
shallow  portions.  The  lake  is  more  than  8  miles  wide,
however,  and  the  water  is  more  than  300  feet  deep  at
various spots around its midpoint.
Creatures:
The loch is home to a tribe of nixes, and
like  the  local  centaurs,  these  creatures  have  agreed  to
help  defend  the  college.  To  that  end,  a  band  of  nixies
lurks under the water about 100 yards from the end of
the dock at all times, keeping an eye on the college.
D
D
Nixies  (6-11):
hp  3  each;  see  
Monster  Manual,  
page 235.
Tactics:
The nixies stick to the water, but they swim
into the shallows to fight if they must. They try to keep
their distance from foes, attacking with their crossbows
and using their 
charm person
abilities. The nixies retreat
to the depths of the lake if they feel endangered.
Parlor
Read  aloud  or  paraphrase  the  following  when  the  PCs
enter this chamber.
The  Fochlucans  find  the  armchairs  a  great  place  for
long discussions of weighty matters, such as the current
political situation or the best way to prepare fresh fish.
The  room’s  windows  keep  it  well  lit  during  daylight
hours. The candlesticks are just like the ones in the library.
The  Fochlucans  tend  to  move  them  around,  but  one
usually stands in the nook and the other near the fireplace.
An  air  of  gentility  and  comfort  prevails  here,  thanks
to  a  thick,  soft  carpet  done  in  rich  brown  shades,  a
pair  of  plush  couches,  and  a  crackling  fire  in  the
hearth.  The  nook  in  the  southwestern  corner  sports
four overstuffed armchairs. A pair of tall, freestanding
candlesticks provides for nighttime illumination.
Bookshelves  line  the  walls  in  this  chamber  to  a
height  of  12  feet,  punctuated  by  large  windows.
Three ladders placed around the room give access
to  the  upper  shelves.  The  stone  floor  is  mostly
covered by a thick rug in a riot of color that looks
like a blanket of autumn leaves.
A  row  of  shelves  along  one  wall  is  packed  with
foodstuffs and dinnerware, and a long trestle table
doubles  as  workspace  and  dinner  table.  The  table
is about chest-high for a human, allowing most of
the  college’s  personnel  to  stand  and  work  there
without  stooping.  Tall  stools  allow  folks  to  sit
comfortably at the table during meals.
Metal pots, pans, and kettles dangle from hooks
set in the ceiling. The fireplace is fitted with spits,
hooks, and racks for cooking.
The floor is bare, smooth stone. The window in
the north wall provides some light during the day,
but  most  of  the  room’s  illumination  comes  from
the fireplace and from an 
everburning torch
set in a
sconce next to the inner door.


9
Servant Quarters (EL 0, 1, 2, or 3)
This  room  is  similar  to  the  guest  room,  except  that  six
servants live here permanently.
Creatures:
During  the  day,  this  room  is  empty
because the residents are working elsewhere in the college
or on the grounds. At night, they are here sleeping.
Servants  (0-6):
Male  or  female  human  or  half-elf
commoner 1; hp 3.
SECOND FLOOR 
This    floor    is    generally    off    limits    to    visitors.
Unauthorized folks who wander up here are first asked
nicely to leave, then forcibly ejected if necessary.
Master’s Room (EL 12)
Each  of  these  three  chambers  contains  two  beds  with
curtained  canopies,  a  divan,  a  worktable  and  writing
desk, two wardrobes, two chests of drawers, a bookcase,
and  two  trunks.  The  typical  bookcase  holds  a  few
volumes borrowed from the library, plus several books
that  belong  to  the  current  residents.  An  
everburning
torch
augments the light from the windows, and a color-
ful rug similar to the one in the library covers the floor. 
Creatures:
These    rooms    are    reserved    for
Fochlucans  who  are  currently  pursuing  projects  at  the
college—usually  the  two  librarians  and  wardens,  plus
anyone  who  currently  has  students  working  in  the
building.  Typically,  each  room  has  one  or  two  occu-
pants, and each master has a key to her own room.
Master: 
Use the statistics for Tyrea Neylis on pages
48-49 of 
Complete Adventurer.
Recital Room
As  the  name  suggests,  the  Fochlucans  practice  music
here.  This  chamber  resembles  the  library,  except  that
the walls are covered with racks and shelves that hold a
vast  array  of  musical  instruments.  Most  of  the  collec-
tion  consists  of  stringed  instruments,  such  as  lutes,
dulcimers, and harps, but a few drums and wind instru-
ments round out the selection.
Servant’s Room (EL 4)
The  college’s  major  domo,  a  human  veteran  named
Colver, lives in this chamber. His room is much like the
masters’  rooms,  except  that  it  contains  only  one  bed,
one chest of drawers, one trunk, and one wardrobe. The
bookcase  holds  ledgers  containing  records  of  the
college’s expenses over the years.
Creatures: 
Colver  usually  roams  the  college  and
grounds  during  the  day,  then  returns  here  at  dusk  to
handle paperwork.
D
D
Colver:
Male  human  warrior  2/expert  3;  CR  4;
Medium  humanoid;  HD  2d8+5  plus  3d6+3;  hp  27;  Init
+1; Spd 30 ft.; AC 12, touch 12, flat-footed 11; Base Atk
+4;  Grp  +5;  Atk  or  Full  Atk  +6  melee  (1d4+1/19–20,
masterwork  dagger)  or  +6  ranged  (1d6/[TS]3,  master-
work  shortbow);  AL  NG;  SV  Fort  +5,  Ref  +2,  Will  +3;  
Str 12, Dex 13, Con 13, Int 14, Wis 11, Cha 10.  
Skills  and  Feats:
Bluff  +4,  Climb  +6,  Diplomacy  +7,
Handle Animal +5, Intimidate +7, Listen +7, Profession
(scribe) +5, Ride +8, Sense Motive +5, Spot +7, Swim +6;
Alertness, Persuasive, Toughness.
Languages:
Common, Giant.
Possessions: Ring  of  protection  +1,
masterwork  dagger,
masterwork shortbow with 20 arrows, 
oil of bless weapon,
potion  of  shield  of  faith
+3,  2  
potions  of  cure  light  wounds,
potion of mage armor,
set of master keys to the college.
Tactics:
If  danger  threatens,  Colver  draws  his
dagger  and  beats  a  hasty  retreat  toward  either  the
gazebo or the Yew Master’s room.
Students’ Quarters (EL 0–13)
This  room  resembles  the  guest  room  on  the  ground
floor, except that it contains a dozen beds and the same
number of trunks. The beds are arranged in two banks
of bunks, each three wide and two high.
Creatures:
The  room  could  house  anywhere  from
no students to more than a dozen at any given time.
Students (0-13):
Male and female bard 1 to bard 6;
use  the  sample  NPC  statistics  in  Chapter  4  of  the
Dungeon Master’s Guide.
Tactics:
In  a  fight,  the  students  try  to  retreat
through the recital room and then toward the masters’
rooms  or  Yew  Master’s  room.  They  use  their  bardic
music and spells to keep their foes off balance.
Yew Master’s Room (EL 13)
The  college’s  senior  members  are  called  yew  masters,
and  one  of  them  is  in  residence  at  all  times.  The  resi-
dent yew master oversees all the activities at the college
and coordinates the defense of the building. Read aloud
or paraphrase the following when the PCs approach the
yew master’s room.
This opulent chamber is lavishly furnished. The bed
has  a  thick  feather  mattress,  a  down  quilt,  and  a
curtained  canopy.  To  one  side  are  a  worktable  and
writing desk, and to the other side stand a wardrobe,
a  chest  of  drawers,  and  a  trunk.  A  large  bookcase
spans  one  wall.  The  alcove  at  the  south  end  is
furnished with a low table and an overstuffed couch.
On the floor is a heavy rug like the one in the library.


10
Only  the  books  in  the  bookcase  and  the  personal
items  in  the  chest  change  from  one  yew  master  to
another.
Creatures:
The current yew master in residence is
a  half-elf  named  Noelin,  who  is  very  much  a  typical
member of the Yew Circle. He is known for his eclectic
skills, wide interests, and detached manner.
D
D
Noelin:
Male  half-elf  rogue  3/druid  3/bard
3/fighter  1/Fochlucan  lyrist  4;  CR  14;  Medium
humanoid;  HD  10d6  plus  3d8  plus  1d10;  hp  53;  Init
+6;  Spd  30  ft.;  AC  20,  touch  15,  flat-footed  20;  Base
Atk +11; Grp +11; Atk +12 melee (1d8/19–20, master-
work  longsword)  or  +14  ranged  (1d6/[TS]3,  master-
work    shortbow);    Full    Atk    +12/+7/+2    melee
(1d8/19–20,  masterwork  longsword)  or  +14/+9/+4
ranged (1d6/[TS]3, masterwork shortbow); SA sneak
attack  +2d6;  SQ  animal  companion  (Julius;  link,
share  spells),  bardic  knowledge  +8,  bardic  music
(countersong, 
fascinate,
inspire   competence   +1,
inspire  courage,  
suggestion
)  11/day,  evasion,  half-elf
traits,  nature  sense,  trackless  step,  trap  sense  +1,
trapfinding,  wild  empathy  +7,  woodland  stride;  AL
N;  SV  Fort  +8,  Ref  +13,  Will  +13  (+15  against
enchantments);  Str  10,  Dex  15,  Con  10,  Int  12,
Wis 14, Cha 18.  
Skills   and   Feats:
Balance   +4,   Concentration   +9,
Decipher     Script     +8,     Diplomacy     +13,     Gather
Information  +13,  Hide  +10,  Jump  +2,  Knowledge
(nature)  +14,  Listen  +9,  Move  Silently  +8,  Perform
(stringed  instrument)  +20,  Ride  +3,  Search  +7,  Sense
Motive  +12,  Sleight  of  Hand  +8,  Speak  Language
(Druidic), Spellcraft +4, Spot +9, Survival +6, Tumble +8;
Dodge
B
,   Extra   Music*,   Heighten   Spell,   Improved
Initiative, Lyric Spell*, Spell Focus (enchantment).
* New feat from 
Complete Adventurer.
Languages:
Common, Druidic Elven, Sylvan
Sneak Attack (Ex):
Noelin deals 2d6 extra points
of damage on any successful attack against flat-footed
or  flanked  targets,  or  against  a  target  that  has  been
denied  its  Dexterity  bonus  for  any  reason.  This
damage  also  applies  to  ranged  attacks  against  targets
up to 30 feet away. Creatures with concealment, crea-
tures  without  discernible  anatomies,  and  creatures
immune  to  extra  damage  from  critical  hits  are  all
immune  to  sneak  attacks.  He  may  choose  to  deliver
nonlethal  damage  with  his  sneak  attack,  but  only
when using a weapon designed for that purpose, such
as a sap (blackjack).
Animal Companion (Ex):
The companion’s abil-
ities and characteristics are summarized below. 
Julius:
Male  riding  dog  companion;  CR  —;
Medium animal; HD 4d8+8; hp 26; Init +3; Spd
40 ft.; AC 19, touch 13, flat-footed 16; Base Atk
+3;  Grp  +6;  Atk  or  Full  Atk  +6  melee  (1d6+4,
bite); SQ evasion, low-light vision, scent, tricks
(attack,  come,  defend,  defensive  guarding*,
guard,  heel,  stay,  track);  AL  N;  SV  Fort  +6,  
Ref  +7,  Will  +2;  Str  16,  Dex  16,  Con  15,  Int  2,
Wis 12, Cha 6.  
* New trick from Complete Adventurer.
Skills  and  Feats:  
Jump  +13,  Listen  +5,  
Spot +5, Swim +4; Alertness, Dodge, Track
B
.
Evasion (Ex):
If Julius is exposed to any
effect  that  normally  allows  him  to  attempt  a
Reflex  saving  throw  for  half  damage,  he  takes
no damage with a successful saving throw.
Animal Companion Benefits (Ex):
Noelin has
a  riding  dog  named  Julius  as  an  animal  companion.
Julius and Noelin enjoy the link and share spells special
qualities. 
Link (Ex):
Noelin can handle Julius as a free action. He
also  gains  a  +4  circumstance  bonus  on  all  wild  empathy
checks and Handle Animal checks made regarding Julius. 
Share  Spells  (Ex):
Noelin  may  have  any  spell  he  casts
on himself also affect Julius if the latter is within 5 feet
at the time. Noelin may also cast a spell with a target of
“You” on Julius.
Bardic Music:
Noelin can use bardic music eleven
times per day. See the bard class features on page 29 of
the 
Player’s Handbook.
Countersong  (Su):
Noelin  can  use  music  or  poetics  to
counter magical effects that depend on sound. 
Fascinate (Sp):
Noelin can use music or poetics to cause
one or more creatures to become fascinated with him. 
Inspire Competence (Su):
Noelin can use music or poet-
ics to help an ally succeed at a task. 
Inspire Courage (Su):
Noelin can use music or poetics
to  bolster  his  allies  against  fear  and  improve  their
combat abilities.
Suggestion  (Sp):
Noelin  can  use  music  or  poetics  to
make a 
suggestion
(as the spell) to a creature that he has
already fascinated.
Evasion  (Ex):
If  Noelin  is  exposed  to  any  effect
that  normally  allows  him  to  attempt  a  Reflex  saving
throw  for  half  damage,  he  takes  no  damage  with  a
successful saving throw.
Half-Elf  Traits:
Half-elves  have  immunity  to
magic 
sleep
effects. For all effects related to race, a half-
elf is considered an elf. 


11
Trackless  Step  (Ex):
Noelin  leaves  no  trail  in
natural surroundings and cannot be tracked.
Trapfinding  (Ex):
Noelin  can  find,  disarm,  or
bypass traps with a DC of 20 or higher. He can use the
Search  skill  to  find,  and  the  Disable  Device  skill  to
disarm, magic traps (DC 25 + the level of the spell used
to  create  it).  If  his  Disable  Device  result  exceeds  the
trap’s DC by 10 or more, he discovers how to bypass the
trap without triggering or disarming it.
Woodland   Stride   (Ex):
Noelin   may   move
through  natural  thorns,  briars,  overgrown  areas,  and
similar terrain at his normal speed and without damage
or other impairment. However, thorns, briars, and over-
grown  areas  that  are  magically  manipulated  to  impede
motion still affect him.
Bard Spells Known
(3/4/3/1 per day; caster level 7th):
0—
dancing lights, detect magic, ghost sound
(DC 14), 
mage
hand,  prestidigitation,  summon  instrument*;  
1st—
alarm,
charm person
(DC 16), 
feather fall, lesser confusion
(DC 16);
2nd—
detect thoughts, enthrall
(DC 17), 
invisibility, tongues;
3rd—
confusion
(DC 18), 
see invisibility.
* New spell from 
Complete Adventurer.
Druid  Spells  Prepared
(caster  level  7th):  0—
cure  minor
wounds,  detect  magic
(2), 
guidance,  read  magic,  resistance;
1st—
cure light wounds
(2), 
faerie fire, longstrider, speak with
animals; 
2nd—
chill metal
(DC 14), 
flame blade
(+10 melee
touch), 
resist  energy,  summon  swarm;
3rd—
contagion
(DC 15), 
poison
(DC 15); 4th—
flame strike
(DC 16).
Possessions: Amulet  of  natural  armor  +2,  bracers  of  armor
+3,  ring  of  protection  +3,
masterwork  longsword,  master-
work shortbow with 20 arrows, 
oil of bless weapon, potion
of shield of faith
+3, 
potion of cure light wounds, oil of greater
magic weapon,
masterwork lute, set of master keys to the
college, 5 gp.
Tactics: 
In  a  fight,  Noelin  tries  to  draw  the  foe
outside,  where  Elibroviel  (see  the  Gazebo  entry)  can
help.  He  uses  
summon  swarm
and 
confusion
spells  in
combination  with  
suggestion
(bardic  music  ability)  to
confound  the  enemy.  Once  he  has  the  foe  off-balance,
he and Julius move to attack. Noelin tries to use Julius
to flank opponents so that he can make sneak attacks.
Development:
Noelin  is  quick  to  investigate  any
disturbance within the building, and he doesn’t hesitate
to attack visitors who become violent.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Skip  Williams  keeps  busy  with  freelance  projects  for
several different game companies, and he served as the
sage  of  
Dragon  Magazine
for  eighteen  years.  Skip  is  a
codesigner of the D&D 3rd edition game and the chief
architect  of  the  
Monster  Manual.
When  not  devising
swift  and  cruel  deaths  for  player  characters,  Skip
putters  in  his  kitchen  or  garden  (rabbits  and  deer  are
not Skip’s friends) or works on repairing and improving
the century-old farmhouse that he shares with his wife,
Penny, and a growing menagerie of pets.
