Ghouls (3):CR 1; Medium undead; HD 2d12; hp 13, 13, 18;
Init +2; Spd 30 ft.; AC 14, touch 12, flat-footed 12; Base Atk +1; Grp
+2; Atk +2 melee (1d6+1 plus paralysis, bite); Full Atk +2 melee
(1d6+1 plus paralysis, bite) and +0/+0 melee (1d3 plus paralysis, 2
claws); Space/Reach 5 ft./5 ft.; SA ghoul fever, paralysis; SQ +2
turn resistance, undead traits; AL CE; SV Fort +0, Ref +2, Will +5;
Str 13, Dex 15, Con —, Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 12.
Skills and Feats:Balance +6,
Climb +5, Hide +6, Jump +5,
Move Silently  +6,  Spot  +7;
Multiattack (see page 304 of
the Monster Manual).
Ghoul Fever (Su):Those hit
by a ghoul’s bite must succeed
on a DC 12 Fortitude save or
succumb to ghoul fever (incu-
bation period 1 day, damage
1d3  Con  and  1d3  Dex).  A
humanoid who dies of ghoul
fever rises as a ghoul at mid-
night of the next day (see page
118 of the Monster Manualfor
more information).
Paralysis (Ex):Those hit by a
ghoul’s  bite  or  claw  attack
must succeed on a DC 12 For-
titude save or be paralyzed for
1d4+1   minutes.   Elves   are
immune to this paralysis.
Undead Traits:Darkvision
out to 60 feet. Immunity to
poison,  magic  sleepeffects,
paralysis, stunning, disease,
and death effects. Not subject
to   critical   hits,   nonlethal
damage,   ability   drain,   or
energy  drain.  Immunity  to
any effect that requires a Forti-
tude save (unless the effect
also  works  on  objects  or  is
harmless).  Not  at  risk  of  death  from  massive  damage,  but
destroyed when reduced to 0 hit points or lower. Not affected by
raise deador reincarnatespells or abilities.
STATISTICS BLOCKS
Every character and creature in the D&D game has a number of
different abilities and characteristics. A creature’s statistics block
(“stat block” for short)  summarizes those attributes.
At the end of the sample adventure above, statistics blocks are
provided for the spiders and the ghouls that the PCs encounter.
This information is taken from the Monster Manualentries for
those creatures and presented here in an abbreviated form. Many
published adventures contain stat blocks for the creatures therein
as a convenience, preventing you from needing to look up infor-
mation from one of the core rulebooks (usually the Monster
Manual) in order to run the adventure.
Some stat blocks are less detailed than others, sometimes
because those characters or creatures are only “bit players” (com-
moners or other unimportant NPCs) and sometimes because only
certain aspects of a creature’s abilities are relevant to the adventure. 
For instance, the stat block for a gold dragon would only need
to mention that the dragon can breathe underwater if the place
where it’s encountered includes a body of water large enough for
this ability to be potentially useful.
Following is a summary of the main elements of a statistics
block. All the terms used in this summary are discussed in more
detail elsewhere in the rules. For examples of various types of
character stat blocks, see the sample NPCs in Chapter 4. For exam-
ples of stat blocks describing various kinds of creatures, see Famil-
iars on pages 200–204.
Name: The word or phrase that identifies the creature.
Race and Class: Provided only for characters with levels.
CR: The Challenge Rating of an individual creature of this kind.
Size and Type: The creature’s
size category and its type (and
subtype or subtypes, if appli-
cable).
HD: The creature’s Hit Dice
(and any hit points it gains or
loses because of its Constitu-
tion modifier).
hp:   The   creature’s   full
normal hit point total (usually
average rolls on each Hit Die).
Init: The creature’s modifier
on initiative checks.
Spd: The creature’s base land
speed, followed by speeds for
other modes of movement if
applicable.
AC: The creature’s Armor
Class  against  most  regular
attacks,  followed  by  its  AC
against touch attacks (which
disregard armor) and its AC
when  flat-footed  (or  at  any
other time when denied its
Dexterity bonus to AC).
Base Atk: The creature’s base
attack bonus without any modi-
fiers.
Grp: The creature’s grapple
bonus (base attack + size modi-
fier + Str bonus).
Atk: The single attack the
creature makes when taking
an attack action (modified attack bonus, whether the attack is
melee or ranged, how much damage the attack deals, and the
weapon used for the attack).
Full Atk: All the physical attacks the creature can make when
taking a full attack action (often the same as the Atk entry).
Space/Reach: How large a square the creature takes up on the
battle grid and how far its natural reach extends. The vast majority
of creatures have a space/reach of 5 ft./5 ft.; as such, a stat block
might omit this entry unless it’s different from the “default.”
SA: The creature’s special attacks (some of which may be de-
scribed in more detail beneath the Skills and Feats paragraph).
SQ: The creature’s special qualities (some of which may be de-
scribed in more detail beneath the Skills and Feats paragraph).
AL: The one- or two-letter abbreviation denoting the creature’s
alignment.
SV: The creature’s saving throw bonuses.
Ability Scores: The creature’s ability scores in the customary
order (Str, Dex, Con, Int, Wis, Cha).
Skills and Feats:In a new paragraph, a list of all the creature’s skill
modifiers and feats.
Details:Special attacks and special qualities that need further
explanation are covered next.
Spells Known:For sorcerers and members of other classes that do
not prepare spells.
Spells Prepared:For wizards, clerics, and members of other classes
that prepare spells. A cleric’s stat block also includes the domains
he has access to (with domain spells asterisked in the list of pre-
85
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES