104
live to commit more evil acts? In some campaigns or some locales
in a campaign world, bounties are paid for living prisoners. The
prisoners’ friends can also offer ransoms to get them back alive.
These two facts can help PCs decide what to do with prisoners, as
can some indication from you through other allied NPCs as to
what the accepted course of action is for the land the characters
are adventuring in. Although you should play the NPCs as appro-
priately as you can, don’t make the PCs face a prisoner dilemma
unless you are sure you want to.
Villains
A diabolical sorcerer, an evil high priest, a master assassin, a lich,
an ancient red dragon—the possibilities for intelligent villains are
endless, and they make for some of the PCs’ most memorable and
most hated foes. A well-played villain can become a recurring
character who is a constant thorn in the side of the PCs. 
Here are some pointers for well-played villains.
Use Lackeys:Don’t have a major villain confront the PCs her-
self unless necessary. Eventually, the PCs will want to take the
fight to her, but she should use underlings, cohorts, and sum-
moned creatures to challenge the characters whenever possible.
Nevertheless, don’t deny the PCs the satisfaction of ultimately
having the opportunity to defeat her.
Be Sneaky and Resourceful:Use all available options to foil
the PCs. A sneaky villain might use undetectable alignmentor non-
detectionto foil attempts to find him. A detect scryingspell or—even
better—a screenspell can keep scrying from revealing his actions.
Mind blankfoils detect thoughts,and spell resistancepotentially foils
most everything. The basic idea to keep in mind is that for every
ability the PCs might have, an NPC villain might be able to
counter it with the right spell, item, or ability.
Have an Escape Plan:Once the PCs have confronted the vil-
lain and foiled his plans, it can be hard for him to get away without
preparing beforehand. PCs are notorious for dogging the heels of
a villain who tries to escape. Use secret passages, invisibility, dimen-
sion door, teleport, contingency,and swarms of underlings to aid the
villain’s escape.
Take Hostages:Put the PCs in a moral dilemma. Are they will-
ing to attack the villain if her servants are prepared to slay on her
command a number of townsfolk she captured?
Use Magic:A high-level villain (even a fighter or a rogue)
should have a great deal of magic to fall back on, perhaps through
the use of spellcasting servants or magic items. The PCs have
plenty of magic to bring to bear against the villain, so she should
have a fair number of tricks and surprises for them as well.
Fight on the Villain’s Terms:A smart villain fights the PCs
only when he has to, and only when he’s prepared. Preferably, he
engages them after they have been weakened by fighting their
way through his guardian- and trap-filled lair.
Animals and Other Monsters
Animals, vermin, magical beasts, and other low-intelligence mon-
sters form a special category of NPC. They don’t act the way more
intelligent creatures do. Instead, they are driven by instinct and
need. Hunger and fear, for example, motivate animals. They are
occasionally curious, but usually they are looking for food. When
setting up encounters with animals other and low-intelligence crea-
tures, remember to develop some sort of ecology. A hundred orcs
might all organize themselves together in one area, but a hundred
displacer beasts never would unless an intelligent, outside force
were compelling them to do so. In a dungeon, for example, preda-
tors need something to eat and probably would not lair too close to
each other to avoid competition for food. The logical demands of an
ecosystem can sometimes make a dungeon difficult to rationalize or
to design so that it is at least somewhat believable. An intelligent,
organizing force often helps to explain the presence of creatures in
numbers or locations contrary to their natural inclination.
Animals and other low-intelligence monsters want to eat, want
to be safe, and want to protect their young. They are not thrilled
about competition for food, but only the most aggressive attack
for no other reason than that. They don’t collect treasure, but the
possessions of the characters they have slain can be found in their
lairs, untouched by the creatures.
These sorts of creatures make great foes for PCs, since few
moral issues are raised by slaying a dire wolf or even an umber
hulk or a wyvern. Thus, even though humans are a poor choice of
prey for most animals in the real world, assume that most preda-
tors in the campaign don’t mind or even prefer hunting and eating
intelligent creatures.
FRIENDS
Not everyone hates the PCs. If the characters are smart, as the
campaign progresses they will make as many friends as enemies.
Characters who don’t oppose the PCs are divided into four types:
allies, cohorts, followers, and hirelings. The Leadership feat (see
PCs as Leaders, page 106) enables a character to attract cohorts and
followers. Allies and hirelings have different relationships with
PCs than cohorts and hirelings do. 
Allies
Markiov Thenuril is a rugged ranger who patrols the wilderness to
the west. Ever since the PCs helped him fight off the gnoll incur-
sion two years ago, he has been willing to provide them with infor-
mation about his territory whenever they need it. He has intro-
duced them to Viran Rainsong, an elf wizard/bard who gives them
great deals on potions and scrolls that she manufactures. Viran’s
half-brother Ethin traveled with the PCs when they went to the
Forgotten Mountain and the Lichlair.
Allies come in two types: those who help the PCs with infor-
mation, equipment, or a place to stay the night, and those who
actually travel with them on adventures. The former make useful
contacts and resources. The latter function as party members and
earn a full share of experience points and treasure just as any
other character does. Essentially, these latter allies are adventur-
ers who just happen not to be controlled by players. They differ
from cohorts and hirelings (see below), who work directly for
the PCs.
Cohorts
Cohorts are loyal servants who follow a particular character or
sometimes a group of characters. (NPC adventurers can have co-
horts, too.) They are hired by or seek out a PC or PCs, and they
work out a deal agreeable to both parties so that the NPC works
for the characters. A cohort serves as a general helper, a body-
guard, a sidekick, or just someone to watch a character’s back.
Although technically subservient, cohorts are usually too valuable
to waste on performing menial tasks.
There are no limitations on the class, race, or gender of a char-
acter’s cohorts, nor limits to the number of cohorts who can be
employed by a character. Mistreated cohorts become disloyal and
eventually leave or even seek revenge against their employers.
Loyal cohorts become trusted friends and long-time helpers.
So, what’s really the difference between allies who come along
and use their abilities to face dangers alongside the PCs, and
cohorts who do the same thing?
Cohorts are people who take on a subservient role. Cohorts are
not leaders. They might voice an opinion now and again, but for
the most part, they do as they’re told. 
Experience Points:Cohorts earn experience points, but not at
the same rate as player characters. To determine a cohort’s XP
award, follow this procedure:
1. Don’t include a cohort as a party member when determining
the XP awards for individual characters. In a party containing four
PCs and one cohort, each PC gets 1/4 of the overall XP award.
CHAPTER 4:
NONPLAYER
CHARACTERS