s you run your campaign, you need to portray all sorts of
characters. Use the information in this chapter for creat-
ing and controlling the NPCs that populate your cam-
paign world.
EVERYONE IN THE WORLD
It’s your job to portray everyone in the world who isn’t a player
character. NPCs run the gamut from the old woman who operates
the livery to the foul necromancer out to destroy the kingdom to
the dragon in its lair, counting gold. The vast majority of folk
don’t care about the PCs unless the PCs have reached the point
where they are saving the world. Even then, most people proba-
bly don’t know about them.
Most people and creatures go about their own lives, oblivious
to the actions of the PCs and the events in the PCs’ adventures.
Common people whom they meet in a town won’t see them as dif-
ferent from anyone else unless the PCs do something to draw
attention to themselves. In short, the rest of the world doesn’t
know that the PCs are, in fact, player characters. It treats them no
differently from anyone else, gives them no special breaks (or spe-
cial penalties), and gives them no special attention. The PCs have
to rely on their own actions. If they are foolish or unruly, they
make enemies and earn the distrust of all. If they are wise and
kind, they make friends and garner respect—and probably also
run afoul of enemies that don’t share the PCs’ virtues.
ENEMIES
Running the foes of the PCs is one of your main tasks, and one of
the most fun. When creating enemies for the PCs, keep the fol-
lowing points in mind.
Fully Rounded Characters:Flesh out enemies. Give
thought to why NPCs are doing what they do, why they are
where they are, and how they interact with all that’s around
them. If you don’t think of them as just bad guys for the
PCs to kill, the players won’t either.
Intelligence:Play enemies as smart as they are—no
more, no less. Ogres might not be the best strategists, but
mind flayers are incredibly intelligent and always have
schemes and contingency plans.
Don’t Be Afraid to Make Them Evil:Evil is evil. Don’t
hesitate to make the villains truly vile. Betrayal, devious lies,
and hideous acts all make enemies more rewarding to
defeat.
Evil Is Not Everywhere:An NPC opponent doesn’t
have to be evil. Sometimes neutral and even good char-
acters might oppose what the PCs are doing, since not
all good people agree on everything. Sometimes it’s
interesting to face an opponent whom you don’t want
to kill outright.
Evil Doesn’t Always Cooperate:Even if all the
PCs’ foes are evil, that doesn’t mean they all work
together. In fact, evil rarely gets along with evil (par-
ticularly in the case of chaotic evil creatures), because
the goals of one selfish, destructive creature by defi-
nition  conflict  with  the  goals  of  other  selfish,
destructive creatures.
The Prisoner Dilemma:What should the PCs do
with enemy prisoners? If an NPC foe surrenders, the
characters face a quandary. Do they spare the lives of
their evil foes, or put them to the sword? What’s the
greater wrong, killing something evil or letting it
103
Illus. by  A. Swekel