212
newly created wand has 50 charges, and each use of the wand
depletes one of those charges.
Wondrous Items:These objects include magic jewelry, tools,
books, clothing, and much more. They range from innocuous
items such as a hat of disguise, which allows the wearer to take on
the appearance of others, to the monstrous apparatus of Kwalish, a
metallic, crablike construction that characters can ride within and
control.
HANDLING MAGIC ITEMS
You should keep all the following information in mind when deal-
ing with magic items.
PLACEMENT AS TREASURE
Including magic items as part of a treasure is a vital task of the
DM. It’s also a delicately difficult one. It can be tempting to hand
out powerful or particularly interesting items too soon or too
often. (A smaller number of DMs make the opposite mistake,
being too stingy and handing out too few magic items.) A single
overpowering item can ruin a whole campaign—but if the PCs
don’t get enough magic items, they won’t be powerful enough to
deal with the challenges that have been balanced for characters of
their level. The treasure tables (pages 52–53) were designed to
help in this regard (see Random Magic Items, page 216). Occa-
sionally, however, you’ll want to give your players items you have
hand-picked as especially suitable for their characters. Feel free to
do this more and more as you gain experience as a DM and—
most important—as you become familiar with what the items
can and can’t do.
Remember that magic items can and probably will be used by
the NPCs who own them. If an orc chief has a +2 longswordin his
treasure hoard, most likely he’ll use it in that final battle with the
PCs’ champion. Creatures such as a medusa or a lammasu might
be able to use certain items, such as a necklace of adaptation, and
even a dragon can drink a potion.
APPEARANCE
Most magic items come into the campaign as treasure found by
the PCs. When they find a new item, you have to describe it to
them. Describing magic items to the players verbally requires a
little forethought on your part. You don’t want to say “You see a +2
short swordand a wand of webon the table.” That gives away too
much information. Presumably, a character can’t tell what bonus a
magic weapon has by looking at it, and can’t know a wand’s spell by
its appearance. Even if he or she could identify an item in this way,
that should be because the ability to do so is something that you
have consciously decided to incorporate into your game.
You have three approaches to choose from when describing
magic items.
Magic Items Appear Mundane:Magic items don’t look like
anything special. Only detect magicor a suspicious, curious, or lucky
player (see Trial and Error, below) allows a PC to discover that the
stick he’s been using as a backscratcher is really a staff of the magi.
The benefit to this approach is that characters are always curiously
examining everything. The drawback is that the characters are
always curiously examining everything, taking a great deal of time
away from the action. You also run the risk of making magic seem
dull because magic items are nothing special to look at.
Magic Items Appear Distinctive: Magic items glow, pulse
with power, and are covered in runes, gems, and ornate workman-
ship. In this flashy sort of campaign, appearance usually has a
direct relationship to the power of the item. Magic swords glow,
and particularly powerful magic swords (encrusted with gems or
carved entirely from a single pure gemstone) glow particularly
bright. The item’s appearance also may be a clue to its powers. A
wand of burning handscould be carved from cedar or redwood with
a fiery pattern etched into its surface in gold leaf.Boots of speed
might be stitched with the image of a runner on their sides. The
benefit of this approach is that magic items always seem grand and
marvelous. The drawback is that they also become obvious, to the
point of being ostentatious.
Magic Items Vary in Appearance:Magic items vary greatly in
appearance, from unremarkable to exotic-looking. (This is the
default method. Magic items described in this chapter were han-
dled in this way.) Sometimes great power lies hidden within
modest housing. Other times, items indicate their function or
level of power in obvious ways. This case-by-case approach has the
benefits and drawbacks of both methods above and allows you to
focus your level of detail where and when you want to.
IDENTIFYING ITEMS
When PCs find magic items as treasure, they’re going to need to
figure out what to do. The following methods are available to iden-
tify magic items.
Trial and Error:This is often the first approach that a group of
PCs tries once they believe they’ve found a magic item. It’s a fun
part of any game. Without access to spells that tell what an item
does, PCs are free to experiment. This usually entails a PC attempt-
ing to use the item. “I put the ring on and jump up and down, flap-
ping my arms,” a player might say. If the item happens to be a ring
of jumping, then the experiment (and the good guesswork) should
be rewarded. Or, the character might put the same ring on and ask
if she feels anything. In this case, a DM might say, “You feel light-
headed and your stomach lurches upward,” or even “You feel par-
ticularly light on your feet.” With items that are normally com-
pletely consumed, allow for minor experimentation. A sip of a
potion, for example, might be enough to give a character a tin-
gling sensation and some clue to its function.
Close study of an item might provide some information. A
command word could be etched in tiny letters on the inside of a
ring, or a feathered design might hint that it allows one to fly. In
such a case, a DC 15 (or maybe 20) Search check should reveal
the clue.
You might also permit a character to attempt a DC 30 Spellcraft
check or Knowledge (arcana) check to determine if she can attune
herself with the item’s power or if she remembers reading of it
once in her studies. The PCs may want to consult bards, sages, or
high-level spellcasters who might be able to identify items either
through their own spell use, prior knowledge and experience, or
research. They might know some details or rumors about an item’s
history as well. Such consultants always want something in return
for the information, of course.
Spells: Obviously, the easiest way for characters to discern
whether an object is magical is to use detect magic. That spell can
also be used to find out a little about an item. When focused on
an item, it can determine the school of the spell or spells embed-
ded within it, as well as the strength of the aura the item gives off
(based on the caster level). When a character uses detect magicon
a magic item, the information you provide often serves as a clue
to a smart player for identifying the item. Because of this, always
be clear about the school of the spell and the caster level. (See the
detect magicspell description on page 219 of the Player ’s Handbook
for exact details.)
Theidentifyand analyze dweomerspells provide much more
information. See their descriptions in the Player ’s Handbook.
DM Explanation: Eventually, you might just break down and
tell the players what an item is. That’s okay, particularly when the
item provides a bonus on actions the PC is already taking. The
player of a character using a +2 short sword, for example, eventually
notices the amount that the sword is helping him and can thereby
determine its bonus. Use this option if it becomes a pain for you to
keep mentally adding +2 to all the character’s attack and damage
rolls with that unidentified (to him) item.
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS