Dungeon Master's Guide v.3.5 Errata 3/10/04 Version 032004 
Dungeon Master's Guide v.3.5 Errata 
 
Errata Rule: Primary Sources 
When you find a disagreement between two D&D rules 
sources, unless an official errata file says otherwise, the 
primary source is correct. One example of a 
primary/secondary source is text taking precedence over a 
table entry. An individual spell description takes precedence 
when the short description in the beginning of the spells 
chapter disagrees. 
Another example of primary vs. secondary sources involves 
book and topic precedence. The Player’s Handbook, for 
example, gives all the rules for playing the game, for PC 
races, and the base class descriptions. If you find something 
on one of those topics from the Dungeon Master’s Guide or 
the Monster Manual that disagrees with the Player’s 
Handbook, you should assume the Player’s Handbook is the 
primary source. The Dungeon Master’s Guide is the primary 
source for topics such as magic item descriptions, special 
material construction rules, and so on. The Monster Manual 
is the primary source for monster descriptions, templates, and 
supernatural, extraordinary, and spell-like abilities. 
Ogre CR 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 38 
Problem: Table at bottom right says ogres are CR 2 (without 
class levels). Monster Manual says (correctly) that ogres are 
CR 3. 
Solution: CR numbers in the two ogre lines of the table need 
changing—increment all of them by 1. Also, change “2” to 
“3” in the note beneath the table. 
Climb DCs 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 60 
Problem: Climb DCs on Table 3–9 differ from what’s given 
in the text on page 59. 
Solution: On Table 3–9, change the following Climb DCs: 
Masonry 20 
Superior masonry 25 
Hewn stone 25 
Unworked stone 15 
Ram Damage 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 100 
Problem: Damage value for the ram given in the text 
disagrees with Table 3–26. 
Solution: Change table entry to 3d8. 
NPC Fighter 
Dungeon Master’s G uide, page 117 
Problem: The 17th-level fighter has his Str enhanced by +2 
(see top right of page), but the enhancement isn’t accounted 
for in his gear. 
Solution: Add “gauntlets of ogre power +2” to the 17th-
level Gear entry on Table 4–16. Add “gauntlets +2” to the 
18th-level Gear entry on the table. 
NPC Monk 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 118 
Problem: References to ki strike need fixing in three places. 
Solution: In the sample 5th-level monk, change “ki strike 
+1” to “ki strike (magic).” In the Ki Strike paragraph for the 
5th-level monk, delete “lawful.” In the sample 15th-level 
monk, change “ki strike +4” to “ki strike (lawful, magic).” 
NPC Sorcerer 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 125 
Problem: The 14th-level sorcerer has his Dex enhanced by 
+2 (see page 124), but the enhancement isn’t accounted for in 
his gear. 
Solution: Add “gloves of Dexterity +2” to the 14th-level 
Gear entry on Table 4–21, and “gloves +2” to the Gear entry 
at every higher level. 
Epic Druid 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 208 
Problem: Druids no longer get multiple animal companions. 
Solution: Replace the Animal Companion paragraph with the 
following text: 
Animal Companion: The epic druid’s animal companion 
continues to increase in power. At every three levels higher 
than 18th (21st, 24th, 27th, and so on), the companion gains 
+2 bonus Hit Dice, its natural armor increases by 2, its 
Strength and Dexterity modifiers increase by 1, and it learns 
one additional bonus trick. 
Epic Ranger 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 208 
Problem: Mention of the epic ranger’s animal companion is 
missing. 
Solution: After the Spells paragraph, insert the following 
paragraph: 
Animal Companion: The epic ranger’s animal companion 
continues to increase in power as normal. For rangers above 
41st level, consult the epic druid for details on how an animal 
companion’s power level increases. 
Caster Level 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 215 
Problem: The last two sentences in the section on Caster 
Level are ambiguous and potentially misleading. 
Solution: Replace with this text: For other magic items, the 
caster level is determined by the creator. The minimum caster 
level is that which is needed to meet the prerequisites given. 
Arrow Deflection 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 218 
Problem: The first sentence is no longer accurate (Deflect 
Arrows feat works differently in v.3.5). 
Solution: Change first sentence to read: 
A shield with this ability protects the wielder from ranged 
attacks.