of travel as described in Chance to Get Lost, above, to see if the
party maintains its new course or begins to move at random again.
Conflicting Directions:It’s possible that several characters may
attempt to determine the right direction to proceed after becom-
ing lost. That’s just fine. You make a Survival check for each char-
acter in secret, then tell the players whose characters succeeded
the correct direction in which to travel, and tell the players whose
characters failed a random direction they think is right. (Tip:A few
extraneous die rolls behind your screen might make it less appar-
ent which characters are right and which characters are wrong.)
Regaining Your Bearings: There are several ways to become
un-lost. First, if the characters successfully set a new course and
follow it to the destination they’re trying to reach, they’re not lost
anymore. Second, the characters through random movement
might run into an unmistakable landmark. Third, if conditions
suddenly improve—the fog lifts or the sun comes up—lost char-
acters may attempt to set a new course, as described above, with a
+4 bonus on the Survival check. Finally, magic such as find the path
may make their course clear.
FOREST TERRAIN
Forest  terrain  can  be  divided  into  three  categories:  sparse,
medium, and dense. An immense forest could have all three cate-
gories within its borders, with more sparse terrain at the outer
edge of the forest and dense forest at its heart.
The table below describes in general terms how likely it is that
a given square has a terrain element in it. You shouldn’t roll for
each square. Instead, use the percentages in the table below to
guide the maps you create.
Forest Terrain Features
———— Category of Forest ————
SparseMediumDense
Typical trees50%70%80%
Massive trees—10%20%
Light undergrowth50%70%50%
Heavy undergrowth—20%50%
Trees: The most important terrain element in a forest is the trees,
obviously. Place a dot in the center of each square that you decide
has a tree in it, and don’t worry about the tree’s exact location within
the square. A creature standing in the same square as a tree gains a
+2 bonus to Armor Class and a +1 bonus on Reflex saves (these
bonuses don’t stack with cover bonuses from other sources). The
presence of a tree doesn’t otherwise affect a creature’s fighting space,
because it’s assumed that the creature is using the tree to its advan-
tage when it can. The trunk of a typical tree has AC 4, hardness 5,
and 150 hp. A DC 15 Climb check is sufficient to climb a tree.
Medium and dense forests have massive trees as well. These
trees take up an entire square and provide cover to anyone behind
them. They have AC 3, hardness 5, and 600 hp. Like their smaller
counterparts, it takes a DC 15 Climb check to climb them.
Undergrowth: Vines, roots, and short bushes cover much of the
ground in a forest. A space covered with light undergrowth costs 2
squares of movement to move into, and it provides concealment.
Undergrowth increases the DC of Tumble and Move Silently
checks by 2 because the leaves and branches get in the way.
Heavy undergrowth costs 4 squares of movement to move into,
and it provides concealment with a 30% miss chance (instead of the
usual 20%). It increases the DC of Tumble and Move Silently checks
by 5. Heavy undergrowth is easy to hide in, granting a +5 circum-
stance bonus on Hide checks. Running and charging are impossible.
Squares with undergrowth are often clustered together. Under-
growth and trees aren’t mutually exclusive; it’s common for a
5-foot square to have both a tree and undergrowth.
Forest Canopy: It’s common  for  elves  and  other  forest
dwellers to live on raised platforms far above the surface floor.
These wooden platforms generally have rope bridges (described
on page 64) between them. To get to the treehouses, characters
generally ascend the trees’ branches (Climb DC 15), use rope lad-
ders (Climb DC 0), or take pulley elevators (which can be made to
rise a number of feet equal to a Strength check, made each round
as a full-round action). Creatures on platforms or branches in a
forest canopy are considered to have cover when fighting crea-
tures on the ground, and in medium or dense forests they have
concealment as well.
Other Forest Terrain Elements: Fallen logs generally stand
about 3 feet high and provide cover just as low walls do. They
cost 5 feet of movement to cross. Forest streams are generally 5
to 10 feet wide and no more than 5 feet deep. Pathways wind
through most forests, allowing normal movement and providing
neither cover nor concealment. These paths are less common in
dense forests, but even unexplored forests will have occasional
game trails.
Stealth and Detection in a Forest: In a sparse forest, the max-
imum distance at which a Spot check for detecting the nearby
presence of others can succeed is 3d6×10 feet. In a medium
forest, this distance is 2d8×10 feet, and in a dense forest it is
2d6×10 feet.
Because any square with undergrowth provides concealment,
it’s usually easy for a creature to use the Hide skill in the forest.
Logs and massive trees provide cover, which also makes hiding
possible.
The background noise in the forest makes Listen checks more
difficult, increasing the DC of the check by 2 per 10 feet, not 1 (but
note that Move Silently is also more difficult in undergrowth).
Forest Fires (CR 6)
Most campfire sparks ignite nothing, but if conditions are dry,
winds are strong, or the forest floor is dried out and flammable, a
forest fire can result. Lightning strikes often set trees afire and
start forest fires in this way. Whatever the cause of the fire, travel-
ers can get caught in the conflagration.
A forest fire can be spotted from as far away as 2d6×100 feet by
a character who makes a Spot check, treating the fire as a Colossal
creature (reducing the DC by 16). If all characters fail their Spot
checks, the fire moves closer to them. They automatically see it
when it closes to half the original distance.
Characters who are blinded or otherwise unable to make Spot
checks can feel the heat of the fire (and thus automatically “spot”
it) when it is 100 feet away.
87
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES
Sample Temperate Forest Encounter Table (EL 6)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–041d4+3 dryads8
05–101 treant8
11–165th-level lizardfolk druid NPC 7
and 2 centaurs
17–191 nymph7
20–251d4 unicorns7
26–331d6+1 wolves7
34–431d4 centaurs6
44–511d4 dire wolves6
52–611d3 owlbears6
62–691d3 pixies6
70–731 ghast (ghoul) and 2 ghouls5
74–795th-level gnoll ranger NPC5
80–851d4+1 satyrs5
86–881d4+1 owlbear skeletons5
89–931 wraith5
94–972 black bears (animal)4
98–1001 wereboar (lycanthrope)4
For information on how to build your own wilderness encounter
tables, see page 95.