7
First Impression: This district is noticeably
more diverse than the surrounding neighborhoods.
Various humanoids wearing a wide variety of garb rub
shoulders and chat in the streets. The buildings look
somewhat rundown, but most are quite serviceable.
Social Class:Lower class.
Anglers’ Wharf
Those who fish for a living have a district of their own,
if for no other reason than to keep the stench away
from the rest of the city.
Buildings:Shrine (Obad-Hai or Pelor), poor lodg-
ing (5), poor food (10), average trades (2), poor trades
(12), average services (3), poor services (7), poor resi-
dences (60).
First Impression: The smell of fish hangs heav-
ily in the air here, mingled with the tang of saltwater
and sea air. Rough-looking sailors lurch from ship to
pier to tavern.
Social Class:Lower class.
Apartment Homes
This unremarkable district consists of nothing but
unremarkable  residences.  Thus,  it  is  an  excellent
hiding place for those who are skilled at blending in.
Buildings:Average residences (10), poor resi-
dences (55).
First Impression: Rows of apartment buildings
rise like the walls of a canyon on both sides of the
street. Day laborers and craftspeople scurry to and from
work, while the district’s more indolent residents relax
on the building steps.
Social Class:Lower class.
Caravan District
Districts such as this one are common in cities that rely
on overland caravans rather than sea transport for their
imports and exports. Merchants and other foreigners
are  welcomed  here  but  usually  discouraged  from
spending time in the rest of the city.
Buildings:Temple (Fharlanghn), average lodging
(5), poor lodging (15), average food (10), poor food (30),
average trades (9), poor trades (15), average services (9),
poor services (15).
First Impression: This district has fewer build-
ings than most, but animal pens, stables, and circles of
trade wagons squat on many vacant lots. The air is thick
with campfire smoke, and a dozen different languages
can be heard.
Social Class:Lower class.
Goblinoid Ghetto
If a city allows goblinoid residents at all, its other
inhabitants usually prefer to keep them at arm’s length.
The goblinoids who live here eke out a squalid exis-
tence, taking on jobs that no other city resident will
accept.
Buildings:Temple (Gruumsh or Maglubiyet),
poor lodging (1), poor food (8), poor trades (20), poor
services (10), poor residences (60).
First Impression: Goblins, hobgoblins, and
orcs move among the ramshackle buildings that line
the streets. The ghetto bustles with business—both
legal and illegal—despite the obvious poverty of its res-
idents.
Social Class:Lower class.
Inn District
Inns are scattered across most cities, but sometimes a
cluster of them dominates a neighborhood. Such a dis-
trict tends to be rundown simply because it has few
permanent residents to care about its upkeep, and the
transients who stay there spend most of their time in
other districts.
Buildings:Temples (any 2), average lodging (8),
poor lodging (25), average food (5), poor food (20), aver-
age trades (5), poor trades (15), average services (5),
poor services (15).
First Impression: Music and laughter wafts
from the open doors of half a dozen inns and common-
houses. Each offers the promise of food, drink, danc-
ing, or perhaps even more exotic diversions.
Social Class:Lower class.
Red-Light District
Notorious for the prostitution, narcotics, and other
black-market businesses that thrive here, a red-light
district tends to attract adventurers like flies.
Buildings:Temple (Olidammara), average lodg-
ing (2), poor lodging (17), average food (5), poor food
(20), poor trades (20), poor services (gambling halls,
houses of ill repute, pawnshops, and the like) (35).
First Impression: A visitor can hardly walk 30
feet in this rundown district without being proposi-
tioned for something illegal. Some passersby scurry
furtively past, while others beckon visitors toward
some illicit pleasure.
Social Class:Lower class.
Shantytown
Many of the structures in this district seem to be in
imminent danger of collapsing on their residents. The