11
districts, while an average metropolis (eighty districts)
has forty-two lower-class, twenty-four middle-class, and
fourteen upper-class districts. 
One way to distinguish your city from others of sim-
ilar size is to adjust how many districts of each social
class are present. A particularly wealthy city might
have more upper- and middle-class districts and fewer
lower-class districts than normal, while a poor city
would have the opposite ratio. A city heavily engaged
in trade would have a larger middle class (and more
middle-class districts) than one that is mostly isolated
and self-sufficient. 
Generally, districts appear adjacent to others of the
same social class, forming neighborhoods that share a
single social class. In some cases, a neighborhood may
include one or two districts whose social class is one step
higher or lower than that of the other districts nearby. A
neighborhood typically consists of five to eight districts,
and its total population ranges from 1,750 to 4,400. It is
rare, but not unknown, for upper-class and lower-class
districts or neighborhoods to appear side by side. When
such a situation does occur, some geographical or artifi-
cial feature, such as a small cliff, a river, or a wall, usually
separates them from each other.
COMMUNITY WEALTH
As a rule, the most expensive items are available only in
upper-class districts of a city. Districts with lower social
classes have lower gp limits, as shown on Table 1–2: GP
Limit By Social Class.
Table 1–2: GP Limit By Social Class
———————— GP Limit in ———————
Social ClassSmall CityLarge CityMetropolis
Upper15,00040,000100,000
Middle6,00016,00040,000
Lower1,5004,00010,000
Items priced below a city’s gp limit are usually available
immediately, though in some cases a would-be pur-
chaser might have to wait as much as a week to get a
particularly unusual item. Often, some of the more
expensive items available in a given city also require
waiting periods.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
David Noonan, a game designer at Wizards of the
Coast, Inc. was one of the developers of the revised
DUNGEONMASTER’s Guide. His other work includes
Manual of the Planes, Stronghold Builder’s Guidebook, and
the forthcoming Unearthed Arcana.
James Wyattis also a game designer at Wizards of
the Coast, Inc. Best known for designing Oriental
Adventures,James recently worked on the Fiend Folio,
the D&D Arms and Equipment Guide,and the forthcom-
ing Book of Exalted Deeds.He worked on D&D v.3.5 as a
designated kibitzer.