140
deal mostly in gold, since they purchase whole ships and buildings
and finance caravans and even armies using such currency.
Some economies have other forms of currency, such as trade
bars or letters of credit representing various amounts of gold that
are backed by powerful governments, guilds, or other organiza-
tions to insure their worth. Some economies even use coins of dif-
ferent metals: electrum, iron, or even tin. In some lands, it’s even
permissible to cut a gold coin in half to make a separate unit of
currency out of a half gold piece.
Taxes and Tithes
Taxes paid to the queen, the emperor, or the local baroness might
consume as much as one-fifth of a character’s wealth (although
these expenses can vary considerably from land to land). Repre-
sentatives of the government usually collect taxes yearly, biannu-
ally, or quarterly. Of course, as travelers, adventurers might avoid
most collection periods (and so you can ignore taxes for the PCs if
you want). Those who own land or a residence may find them-
selves assessed and taxed, however.
Tithes are paid to the church by those who are faithful participants
in a religion. Tithes often amount to as much as one-tenth of a char-
acter’s adventuring earnings, but collection is voluntary except in
strict, oppressive religions that have their own tithe collectors. Such
onerous religious taxation requires the support of the government.
Moneychangers
Characters who find their saddlebags full of ancient coin or foreign
money probably need to exchange their wealth for the local cur-
rency before they can spend any of it. In a setting in which dozens
of small nations and kingdoms are crowded close together, the
moneychanger is the person at the hub of the economic system.
Typically, a moneychanger charges a fee of one-tenth of the
starting sum in order to convert currency. For example, if a charac-
ter has a pouch full of 100 platinum pieces (pp) that she needs to
convert to gold pieces, the moneychanger charges 10 pp for the
conversion. The character receives 900 gp, and the moneychanger
keeps the rest.
Supply and Demand
The law of supply and demand can drastically affect the value of any
currency. If characters start flashing around a lot of gold and pump-
ing it into the local economy, merchants may quickly raise prices.
This isn’t a matter of gouging the rich—it’s just the way a small
economy works. A tavernkeeper who makes 100 gp from boarding
a group of successful adventurers spends his newfound wealth just
as the heroes did, and in a small town, everyone starts spending more
in a short time. More spending means higher consumption, so
goods and services become harder to come by, and prices increase.
Supply and demand can also affect the campaign in ways that
don’t have anything directly to do with gold. For instance, if the
local lord commandeered most of the region’s horses for his
knights, then when the PCs decide to purchase half a dozen fine
steeds, they find there aren’t any to be had at a reasonable price.
They have to settle for second-rate nags or spend much more
than they had planned to in order to convince someone to part
with a horse.
POLITICS
Intrigue between kingdoms, city-states at war, and political
maneuvering are all fun aspects of many campaigns. For your own
campaign, you at least need to determine who is in charge where.
If there’s any chance that rulers, nobility, and politics in general
will become more involved than that, use the following material
as a starting point. As always, research into real-world political sys-
tems and structures (particularly historical examples) can enrich
your fictional setting. At the same time, don’t be afraid to make up
something wholly new and completely nonhistorical.
Political Systems
The number of possible political systems is nearly limitless. Feel
free to use more than one type for different lands. Such mixing
and matching accentuates the differences in place and culture.
Note that any of the political systems listed below might be
matriarchies (ruled only by women) or patriarchies (ruled only by
men), but most make no such distinctions.
Monarchy:Monarchy is rule by a single leader. The monarch
wields supreme power, sometimes even by divine right. Monarchs
belong to royal bloodlines, and successors to the throne are almost
always drawn from blood relatives. Rarely, a monarch rules with
power granted by a mandate of the populace, usually established
through representatives chosen by noble houses. The monarchy is
likely to be the most common political system in your campaign.
Monarchs often have advisors and a court of nobles who work
with them to administer the land. This arrangement creates a class
system of nobles and nonnobles. Common people in such a land
often do not have many of the rights and privileges of the nobility.
Tribal or Clan Structure: A tribe or clan usually has a single
leader who wields great—almost absolute—power like the mon-
arch in a monarchy. Although rulership is often drawn from a
single bloodline, rulers are chosen based on their fitness to govern.
They are also continually judged on this criterion and replaced if
found wanting. Usually a council of elders exists to choose and
judge the leader. In fact, the council is often convened only for this
purpose. Sometimes the council also advises the chief or leader.
Tribes exist as a social structure by grouping together otherwise
disparate family units and uniting them for strength and the ad-
vantages of working together. Clans are similar in function but
carry the added distinction of being extended family units. In
both cases, the group usually interacts with other tribes and clans,
and often has particular laws and customs about how certain clans
within a tribe must interact or how the tribe must interact with
other tribes.
Feudalism:Feudalism is a complicated class-based system
with successive layers of lieges and lackeys. It often exists under a
monarchy. Serfs (peasants) work for a landed lord, who in turn
owes fealty to a higher lord, who in turn owes fealty to an even
higher lord, and so on, until the line reaches the supreme liege
lord, who is usually a monarch.
The common people in a feudal state are always lowly and with-
out rights. They are virtually owned by their immediate liege.
Lords are generally free to abuse their power and exploit those
under them as they see fit.
Republic: A republic is a system of government headed by
politicians representing the people. The representatives of a
republic rule as a single body, usually some sort of council or
senate, which votes on issues and policies. Sometimes the repre-
sentatives are appointed, and sometimes they are elected. The wel-
fare of the people depends solely on the level of corruption among
the representatives. In a mainly good-aligned republic, conditions
can be quite pleasant. An evil republic is as terrible a place to live
as a land under the grip of a tyrant.
In an advanced republic, the people directly elect the represen-
tatives. This type of republic is often called a democracy. In such
lands, the right to vote becomes a class-based privilege. Citizen-
ship might be a status that can be bought or earned, it might be
granted automatically to those born in the location governed by
the republic, or it might only transfer via bloodline. Because
having the entire populace vote on representatives is cumber-
some, this political system usually works only in small areas, such
as a city-state.
Magocracy:In a magocracy, those who wield arcane magic
have a large amount of political power. The ruler is usually the
most powerful wizard or sorcerer in the land, although sometimes
the ruler is merely a member of a royal bloodline who must be an
arcane spellcaster. Thus, such a system could be a monarchy, and
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS