Challenge Ratings for Traps
Traps vary considerably. Those presented in this book
(see pages 70–74) have Challenge Ratings as-
signed to them. For traps you and your players
create, as a rule of thumb, assign +1 CR for
every 2d6 points of damage the trap deals.
For magic traps, start at CR 1 and then assign
+1 CR for every 2d6 points of damage the trap
deals or +1 for every level of the spell the trap
simulates. Traps generally shouldn’t have a
Challenge Rating greater than 10.
Overcoming  the  challenge  of  a  trap
involves encountering the trap, either by
disarming it, avoiding it, or simply sur-
viving the damage it deals. A trap
never     discovered     or     never
bypassed was not encountered
(and  hence  provides  no  XP
award).
Modifying XP Awards
and Encounter Levels
An orc  warband  that  attacks
the  PCs  by  flying  over  them
on  primitive  hang  gliders  and
dropping  large  rocks  is  not  the
same encounter as one in which
the orcs just charge in with spears.
Sometimes, the circumstances give the
characters’  opponents  a  distinct  advan-
tage.  Other  times,  the  PCs  have  an
advantage.  Adjust  the  XP  award  and  the
EL  depending  on  how  greatly  circum-
stances change the encounter’s difficulty.
Encounters  of  EL  2  or  lower  are  the
exception.  They  increase  and  decrease  in
proportion  to  the  change  in  XP.  For  example,
an  EL  1  encounter  that’s  twice  as  difficult  as
normal is EL 2, not EL 3.
You can, of course, increase or decrease XP
by smaller amounts, such as +10% or –10%,
and just eyeball the EL.
Modify all ELs and experience rewards
as you see fit, but keep these points in
mind.
•Experience  points  drive  the  game.
Don’t be too stingy or too generous.
•Most encounters do not need modi-
fying.  Don’t  waste  a  lot  of  time
worrying   about   the   minutiae.
Don’t worry about modifying encounters until after you have
played the game a while.
•Bad  rolls  or  poor  choices  on  the  PCs’
part  should  not  modify  ELs  or  XP
awards. If the encounter is difficult
because the players were unlucky
or  careless,  they  don’t  get  more
experience.
•Just   because   the   PCs   are
worn  down  from  prior  encoun-
ters does not mean that later (more
difficult)   encounters   should   gain
higher  awards.  Judge  the  difficulty  of  an
encounter on its own merits.
Assigning Ad Hoc XP Awards
Sometimes the XP table doesn’t quite
cover a given situation. If two orcs
are an EL 1 encounter, four orcs EL
3, eight orcs EL 5, and sixteen orcs
EL 7 (maybe), are thirty-two orcs
an EL 9 encounter? A party of 9th
level characters almost certainly
can wipe them out with ease. By 9th
level, a character’s defenses are so
good that a standard orc cannot hit
him or her, and one or two spells
cast by a character of that level
could destroy all thirty-two
orcs. At such a point, your
judgment overrules what-
ever the XP table would
say.
An encoun-
ter so easy that it
uses up none or
almost none of
the  PCs’  resources
shouldn’t result in any
XP award at all, while a
dangerous encounter that
the PCs overcome handily
through  luck  or  excellent
strategy is worth full XP. How-
ever, an encounter in which
the PCs defeat something far
above their own level (CRs higher
than their level by eight or more) was
probably the result of fantastic luck or a
unique set of circumstances, and thus a full
XP award may not be appropriate. You’re going
to have to make these decisions. As a guideline, the min-
imum and maximum awards given on Table 2–6: Experi-
ence Point Awards (Single Monster) for a group of a given
level are the least and most XP you should award a group.
Circumstances in your campaign may alter this, however.
You might decide that an EL 2 encounter is worth at least a little to
39
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
CircumstanceXP Award AdjustmentEL Adjustment
Half as difficultXP × 1/2EL –2
Significantly less difficultXP × 2/3EL –1
Significantly more difficult    XP × 1-1/2EL +1
Twice as difficultXP × 2EL +2
VARIANT: FREE-FORM EXPERIENCE
Instead  of  calculating  experience  points,  just  hand  out  about  75  XP
times  the  average  party  level  for  each  character  in  the  party  per
balanced encounter. Hand out more for tough encounters: 100 XP per
level per character, or even 150 XP. Award less for easy ones: 25 to 50
XP.  Alternatively,  you  could  give  out  300  XP  times  the  average  party
level for each character per session, modified slightly for tough or easy
sessions.
It’s very simple to track how quickly characters gain levels using this
system.  The  drawback  is  that  it  generalizes  PC  rewards,  rather  than
granting  them  based  on  specific  accomplishments.  You  risk  players
becoming dissatisfied by gaining the same reward every session.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs