5
(Boccob or Pelor), shrine, upscale lodging (5), upscale
food (8), upscale literary trades (booksellers, stationers,
mapsellers, sealmakers, and the like) (10), upscale liter-
ary services (scribe, sage, translator, cartographer, and
the like) (10), dormitories (5), upscale residences (25).
First Impression: Young, well-dressed students
carrying armfuls of scrolls and books hustle to their
classes. Others sit or stand in circles, discussing the
day’s lessons.
Social Class:Upper class.
Wealthy Residential
These residences belong to successful merchants
and high-level bureaucrats in political or religious
organizations. 
Buildings:Upscale residences (60), average resi-
dences (10).
First Impression: Well-appointed buildings
line the quiet streets of this district. Servants or guards
are posted at many of the front doors.
Social Class:Upper class.
AVERAGE POPULATION DISTRICTS
These districts are where the middle class and mer-
chants live and work.
Average Residential
Shopkeepers, artisans, and other skilled workers dwell
in these modest homes.
Buildings:Upscale residences (10), average resi-
dences (70), poor residences (10).
First Impression: Children play in the streets
of this district, and the younger ones are often chased
by older siblings. Neat rows of houses line the thor-
oughfares.
Social Class:Middle class.
Dwarf Neighborhood
Because clan and family are important to dwarven cul-
ture, many dwarves who live in cities dominated by other
races tend to congregate in their own neighborhoods.
Buildings:Temple (Moradin), average lodging
(2), upscale food, average food (9), poor food (2), exotic
trades (2), upscale trades (7), average trades (15), poor
trades (6), upscale services (5), average services (10),
poor services (5), upscale residences (5), average resi-
dences (45).
First Impression: All the structures in this
neighborhood are slightly smaller than normal because
they’re sized for dwarves. Stonework, much of it finely
carved, dominates the architecture.
Social Class:Middle class.
Garrison
This district is essentially a military encampment. The
soldiers who dwell here are charged with guarding the
city and the surrounding countryside.
Buildings:Garrison building, temple (Heiro-
neous, Kord, or St. Cuthbert), average lodging (4), poor
lodging, upscale food (2), average food (4), poor food
(3), upscale trades (4), average trades (8), poor trades (2),
average services (10), average residences (40), poor resi-
dences (10).
First Impression: Some soldiers march to and
fro in groups, while others stand at attention, and still
others drill for combat. Shouted commands and march-
ing songs fill the air.
Social Class:Middle class.
Gnome Neighborhood
Gnomes find comfort in buildings sized for them, so
this district features architecture that humans and
other Medium races would find cramped.
Buildings:Temple (Garl Glittergold), upscale
lodging (1), average lodging (4), upscale food (3), aver-
age food (5), exotic trades (2), upscale trades (4), average
trades (6), poor trades (3), upscale services (4), average
services (6), average residences (50).
First Impression: This neighborhood looks like
any average residential area, but on a smaller scale. 
Social Class:Middle class.
Guildhall District
This district is home to organizations of skilled work-
ers, such as the mason’s guild, the cobbler’s guild, and
the jeweler’s guild. Depending on the city, more exotic
guilds devoted to sages, wizards, or mercenaries may
also have facilities here. Illicit guilds may exist for
thieves and assassins, but these rarely have publicly
known guildhalls.
Buildings:Guild halls (3), average lodging (5),
average food (10), upscale trades (5), average trades (15),
poor trades (4), upscale services (5), average services
(10), poor services (3), average residences (30).
First Impression: Each of the massive guild-
halls in this district is emblazoned with a symbol repre-
sentative of its craft, such as a massive hammer and
anvil for the blacksmith’s guild, and a welcoming sign
in every known tongue for the Scribe’s Union.
Social Class:Middle class.