makes the experience all the more exciting or real. Sometimes you
can find illustrations in odd places. Jewelry catalogs can provide
visual aids for some magic items or treasure, and sometimes a his-
tory book or encyclopedia with illustrations is just as good as a fan-
tasy book.
Of course, you can’t always have a prop or a picture of some
monster, NPC, or place that you have created. That’s when you
rely on an evocative, exciting description. Pepper your descrip-
tions of what the characters see with adjectives and vivid verbs.
Remember that you are the players’ eyes and ears. “A dank, dark
chamber with moss growing in cracks in the stone walls” is much
more exciting than “a 10-foot-by-10-foot room.” Throughout the
game, continually ask yourself: What exactly do the characters
see? Do they hear anything? Are there any noticeable odors? An
unpleasant tang in the air? Do they feel the chill wind against
their skin? Is their hair tousled by hot, damp gusts?
No player will forget a tense battle on a crumbling bridge in the
middle of a thunderstorm. The best way to get the players’ atten-
tion is with gripping action. While not every encounter needs to
be life-threatening or earth-shaking, keep in mind how it would
all seem in some action movie or exciting book. Villains shout epi-
thets as they fight, and monsters roar menacingly. If a fight against
gnolls is exciting, imagine how much more exciting a fight would
be against gnolls on a ledge around a lava pit.
Some DMs enjoy creating just the right atmosphere for their
playing sessions. Music is often a good way to accomplish this. It’s
sort of like having a soundtrack for your game. Not surprisingly,
those who enjoy using music in their games often use soundtracks
from adventure movies, although classical, ambient, or other
styles work well. Keep in mind, though, that some players may
find music distracting. Be receptive to what your players like—an
atmosphere in which they can’t hear, are distracted, or aren’t enjoy-
ing themselves is never a good one. Other ways DMs can create an
atmosphere are with painted miniatures and dioramas, specially
adjusted lighting, and even sound effects. (If the door to the room
you are in squeaks, you may want to use that when the PCs open a
dungeon door.)
Another element many DMs employ and many players enjoy is
for the DM to use different voices when speaking “in character.”
Practicing several different accents or
ways  of  speaking  and  assigning  them
to different NPCs can be a striking
way to make those characters stand
out in the players’ minds.
Occasionally, a little miming of
actions can supplement a game
that otherwise exists only in your
imagination. If an NPC is shriv-
eled and stooped over when she
walks, stand up and show the players exactly what you mean.
When the ceiling above the PCs begins to collapse, slam your fists
upon the table to simulate the sound of falling rocks. If someone
holds out his hand and offers something to a PC, mime the
action—almost every time, the player (assuming the character
takes what’s offered) will follow your cue instinctively and reach
out, miming the character’s grasping whatever it is. You could
even make a player whose character is invisible sit under the table
to remind everyone that they can’t see her, and her voice just
comes out of nowhere. Keep in mind, though, that this sort of
activity can quickly get out of hand. Don’t act out your combats, or
someone could get a black eye!
Finally, every once in a while, really surprise your players.
The  NPC  they  thought  was  a  villain  turns  out  to  be  a
shapechanged unicorn with only the best of intentions. The
clue they thought led to the treasure vault turns out to be a red
herring. If the PCs are in a dungeon room, and a fire giant is
about to storm into the room and attack, keep your voice at a
moderate or even soft level while describing the room. Then,
suddenly, raise your voice and leap to your feet as the giant
enters. That’ll get their attention.
STYLE OF PLAY
The DM provides the adventure and the world. The players and
the DM work together to create the game as a whole. However, it’s
your responsibility to guide the way the game is played. The best
way to accomplish this is by learning what the players want and
figuring out what you want as well. Many styles of play exist; two
that sit at opposite ends of the playing spectrum are detailed
below as examples.
KICK IN THE DOOR
The PCs kick in the dungeon door, fight the monsters, and get the
treasure. This style of play is straightforward, fun, exciting, and
action-oriented. Very little time is spent on developing personas
for the player characters, roleplaying noncombat encounters, or
discussing situations other than what’s
going on in the dungeon.
7
CHAPTER 1:
RUNNING 
THE GAME
The kick-in-the-door 
style of play.