186
Precise Strike (Ex):At 5th level, a duelist gains the ability to
strike precisely with a light or one-handed piercing weapon,
gaining an extra 1d6 damage added to her normal damage roll.
When making a precise strike, a duelist cannot attack with a
weapon in her other hand or use a shield. A duelist’s precise
strike only works against living creatures with discernible
anatomies. Any creature that is immune to critical hits (includ-
ing undead, constructs, oozes, plants, and incorporeal creatures)
is not vulnerable to a precise strike, and any item or ability that
protects a creature from critical hits (such as armor with the for-
tification special ability)also protects a creature from a precise
strike. At 10th level, the extra
damage on a precise strike
increases to +2d6.
Acrobatic Charge (Ex):
At 6th level, a duelist gains
the ability to charge in sit-
uations where others can-
not. She may charge over
difficult terrain that nor-
mally  slows  movement.
This  enables  her  to  run
down  steep  stairs,  leap
down from a balcony, or to
tumble over tables to get to
her charge target. Depend-
ing on the circumstance, she
may still need to make appro-
priate checks (Jump or Tumble
checks in particular) to success-
fully move over the terrain.
Elaborate Parry (Ex):At 7th
level and higher, if a duelist
chooses to fight defensively or
use  total  defense  in  melee
combat, she gains an additional
+1 dodge bonus to AC for each
level of duelist she has.
Deflect Arrows:At 9th level, a
duelist gains the benefit of the Deflect
Arrows feat (see page 93 of the Player ’s
Handbook) when using a light or one-
handed piercing weapon.
DWARVEN DEFENDER
The defender is a sponsored champion
of a dwarven cause, a dwarf aristocrat, a
dwarven deity, or the dwarven way of
life. As the name might imply, this
character is a skilled combatant
trained in the arts of defense.
A line of dwarven defenders is
a far better defense than a 10-
foot-thick wall of stone, and much more
dangerous.
Most dwarven defenders are fighters, paladins, rangers, or
clerics, although ex-barbarians, sorcerers, wizards, and druids
can certainly all benefit from the defensive capabilities of this
prestige class. Rogues, bards, and monks usually depend too
heavily on mobility to use the abilities of the dwarven defender
class to their fullest.
NPC dwarven defenders are usually soldiers in a dwarven citadel,
segregated into their own units separate from regular warriors or
fighters. Occasionally a lone, wandering dwarven defender can be
encountered on some mission, although he usually guards his words
so closely that it’s difficult to learn what his quest actually entails.
Hit Die:d12.
Requirements
To qualify to become a defender, a character must fulfill all the fol-
lowing criteria.
Race: Dwarf. 
Alignment: Any lawful.
Base Attack Bonus: +7.
Feats: Dodge, Endurance, Toughness.
Class Skills
The defender’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Craft (Int), Listen (Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), and Spot (Wis). See
Chapter 4 of the Player ’s Handbookfor skill descriptions.
Skill Points at Each Level:2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the dwarven defender
prestige class.
AC Bonus (Ex):The dwarven defender receives a
dodge bonus to Armor Class that starts
at +1 and improves as the defender
gains levels, until it reaches
+4 at 10th level.
Weapon   and   Armor
Proficiency: A dwarven
defender is proficient with
all   simple   and   martial
weapons,    all    types    of
armor, and shields. 
Defensive       Stance:
When  he  needs  to,  a  de-
fender can become a stal-
wart bastion of defense. In
this   defensive   stance,   a
defender gains phenomenal
strength and durability, but
he cannot  move  from  the
spot  he  is  defending.  He
gains  +2  to  Strength,  +4  to
Constitution, a +2 resistance
bonus on all saves, and a +4
dodge bonus to AC.
The increase in Constitution
increases  the  defender’s  hit
points by 2 points per level, but
these hit points go away at the end
of the defensive stance when the
Constitution score drops back 4
points. These extra hit points are
not lost first the way temporary hit
points are. While in a defensive
stance,  a  defender  cannot  use
skills or abilities that would re-
quire him to shift his position, such
as Move Silently or Jump. A defensive
stance lasts for a number of rounds equal
to 3 + the character’s (newly improved) Constitution modifier. A
defender may end his defensive stance voluntarily prior to this
limit. At the end of the defensive stance, the defender is winded
and takes a –2 penalty to Strength for the duration of that
encounter. A defender can only use his defensive stance a certain
number of times per day as determined by his level (see Table
6–9). Using the defensive stance takes no time itself, but a
defender can only do so during his action. (A defender can’t, for
example, use the stance when struck down by an arrow in order to
get the extra hit points from the increased Constitution.)
Uncanny  Dodge  (Ex):  Starting  at  2nd  level,  a  dwarven
defender gains the extraordinary ability to react to danger before
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS
A dwarven
defender