232
Strong conjuration; CL 15th; Forge Ring, summon monster VI, all
appropriate spells; Price 200,000 gp.
Energy Resistance:This reddish iron ring continually pro-
tects the wearer from damage from one type of energy—acid,
cold, electricity, fire, or sonic (chosen by the creator of the item;
determine randomly if found as part of a treasure hoard). Each
time the wearer would normally take such damage, subtract the
ring’s resistance value from the damage dealt.
A minor ring of energy resistancegrants 10 points of resistance. A
major ring of energy resistancegrants 20 points of resistance. A greater
ring of energy resistancegrants 30 points of resistance.
Faint (minor or major) or moderate (greater) abjuration; CL 3rd
(minor), 7th (major), or 11th (greater); Forge Ring, resist energy;
Price 12,000 gp (minor), 28,000 gp (major), 44,000 gp (greater).
Evasion:This ring continually grants the wearer the ability to
avoid damage as if she had evasion. Whenever she makes a Reflex
saving throw to determine whether she takes half damage, a suc-
cessful save results in no damage.
Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Forge Ring, jump; Price
25,000 gp.
Feather Falling: This ring is crafted with a feather pattern all
around its edge. It acts exactly like a feather fallspell, activated im-
mediately if the wearer falls more than 5 feet.
Faint transmutation; CL 1st; Forge Ring, feather fall; Price 2,200 gp.
Force Shield: An iron band, this simple ring generates a shield-
sized (and shield-shaped) wall of forcethat stays with the ring and
can be wielded by the wearer as if it were a heavy shield (+2 AC).
This special creation has no armor check penalty or arcane spell
failure chance since it is weightless and encumbrance-free. It can
be activated and deactivated at will as a free action.
Moderate evocation; CL 9th; Forge Ring, wall of force; Price 8,500 gp.
Freedom of Movement: This gold ring allows the wearer to
act as if continually under the effect of a freedom of movement spell.
Moderate abjuration; CL 7th; Forge Ring, freedom of movement;
Price 40,000 gp.
Friend Shield:These curious rings always come in pairs. A
friend shieldring without its mate is useless. Either wearer of one of
a pair of the rings can, at any time, command his or her ring to cast
a shield other spell with the wearer of the mated ring as the recipi-
ent. This effect has no range limitation.
Moderate abjuration; CL 10th; Forge Ring, shield other; Price
50,000 gp (for a pair).
Invisibility:By activating this simple silver ring, the wearer
can benefit from invisibility, as the spell.
Faint illusion; CL 3rd; Forge Ring, invisibility; Price 20,000 gp.
Jumping: This ring continually allows the wearer to leap about,
providing a +5 competence bonus on all his Jump checks.
Faint transmutation; CL 2nd; Forge Ring, creator must have 5
ranks in the Jump skill; Price 2,500 gp.
Jumping, Improved:As jumping, except it grants a +10 com-
petence bonus on its wearer’s Jump check. 
Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Forge Ring, creator must have
10 ranks in the Jump skill; Price 10,000 gp.
Mind Shielding:This ring is usually of fine workmanship and
wrought from heavy gold. The wearer is continually immune to
detect thoughts, discern lies,and any attempt to magically discern her
alignment
.
Faint aburation; CL 3rd; Forge Ring, nondetection; Price 8,000 gp.
Protection:This ring offers continual magical protection in
the form of a deflection bonus of +1 to +5 to AC.
Faint abjuration; CL 5th; Forge Ring, shield of faith, caster must
be of a level at least three times greater than the bonus of the ring;
Price 2,000 gp (ring +1); 8,000 gp (ring +2); 18,000 gp (ring +3);
32,000 gp (ring +4); 50,000 gp (ring +5).
Ram: The ring of the ramis an ornate ring forged of hard metal,
usually iron or an iron alloy. It has the head of a ram (or a billy
goat) as its device.
The wearer can command the ring to give forth a ramlike force,
manifested by a vaguely discernible shape that resembles the head
of a ram or a goat. This force strikes a single target, dealing 1d6
points of damage if 1 charge is expended, 2d6 points if 2 charges
are used, or 3d6 points if 3 charges (the maximum) are used. Treat
this as a ranged attack with a 50-foot maximum range and no
penalties for distance. The ring is useful for knocking opponents
off parapets or ledges, among other things.
The force of the blow is considerable, and those struck by the
ring are subject to a bull rush if within 30 feet of the ring-wearer.
(The ram has Strength 25 and is Large.) The ram gains a +1 bonus
on the bull rush attempt if 2 charges are expended, or +2 if 3
charges are expended.
In addition to its attack mode, the ring of the ramalso has the
power to open doors as if it were a character with Strength 25. If 2
charges are expended, the effect is equivalent to a character with
Strength 27. If 3 charges are expended, the effect is that of a char-
acter with Strength 29.
A newly created ring has 50 charges. When all the charges are
expended, the ring becomes a nonmagical item.
Moderate transmutation; CL 9th; Forge Ring, bull’s strength, tele-
kinesis; Price 8,600 gp.
Regeneration: This white gold ring continually allows a living
wearer to heal 1 point of damage per level every hour rather than
every day. (This ability cannot be aided by the Heal skill.) Non-
lethal damage heals at a rate of 1 point of damage per level every 5
minutes. If the wearer loses a limb, an organ, or any other body
part while wearing this ring, the ring regeneratesit as the spell. In
either case, only damage taken while wearing the ring is regener-
ated.
Strong conjuration; CL 15th; Forge Ring, regenerate; Price
90,000 gp.
Shooting Stars:This ring has two modes of operation, one for
being in shadowy darkness or outdoors at night and a second one
when the wearer is underground or indoors at night.
During the night under the open sky or in areas of shadow or
darkness, the ring of shooting stars can perform the following func-
tions on command.
•Dancing lights(once per hour)
•Light(twice per night)
•Ball lightning(special, once per night)
•Shooting stars(special, three per week)
The first special function, ball lightning,releases one to four
balls of lightning (ring wearer’s choice). These glowing globes
resemble dancing lights, and the ring wearer controls them in the
same fashion (see the dancing lightsspell description in the Player ’s
Handbook). The spheres have a 120-foot range and a duration of 4
rounds. They can be moved at 120 feet per round. Each sphere is
about 3 feet in diameter, and any creature who comes within 5
feet of one causes its charge to dissipate, taking electricity
damage in the process according to the number of balls created.
Number of BallsDamage per Ball
4 lightning balls1d6 points of damage each
3 lightning balls2d6 points of damage each
2 lightning balls3d6 points of damage each
1 lightning ball4d6 points of damage
Once the ball lightningfunction is activated, the balls can be
released at any time before the sun rises. (Multiple balls can be
released in the same round.)
The second special function produces three shooting starsthat
can be released from the ring each week, simultaneously or one at
a time. They impact for 12 points of damage and spread (as a fire-
ball) in a 5-foot-radius sphere for 24 points of fire damage.
Any creature struck by a shooting startakes full damage from
impact plus full fire damage from the spread unless it makes a DC 13
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS