2. Divide the cohort’s level by the level of the PC with whom he
or she is associated (the character who attracted the cohort).
3. Multiply this result by the total XP awarded to the PC and add
that number of experience points to the cohort’s total.
For example, a 4th-level cohort associated with a 6th-level PC
gains 2/3 as much XP as the character gains.
If a cohort gains enough XP to bring it to a level one lower
than the associated PC’s character level, the cohort does not gain
the new level—its new XP total is 1 less than the amount needed
to attain the next level. This rule is especially significant when
the PC loses one or more levels; a cohort’s level advancement
could be stalled for quite some time until the PC regains his or
her lost levels and gains enough additional XP to be eligible for a
higher-level cohort (see the Leadership feat on the following
page).
Treasure:Although the PCs can work out other deals, their
cohorts usually get only a half share of any treasure the party
gains. Sometimes a cohort seeks no pay, only the opportunity to
serve alongside the PCs. Such cohorts require only living costs.
However, they are not common.
The easiest way to calculate a half share is to treat the cohort as
getting a full share, but award him or her only half, and then
divide out the remainder to the group. For instance, if a party of
four PCs and one cohort earns 1,000 gp, divide the gold pieces by
5 (which is 200 apiece), but award the cohort only 100, and divide
the leftover 100 among the four PCs (25 each).
Followers
Followers are similar to cohorts, except they’re generally low-level
NPCs. Because they’re generally five or more levels behind the
character they follow, they’re rarely effective in combat. But a
clever player can use them as scouts, spies, messengers, errand-
runners, or guards.
Followers don’t earn experience and thus don’t gain levels.
However, when a character with the Leadership feat (see page
106) attains a new level, the player consults the table in the feat
description to determine if she has acquired more followers, some
of which may be higher level than the existing followers. (You
don’t consult the table to see if your cohort gains levels, however,
because cohorts earn experience on their own.)
Followers don’t demand a share of treasure, although they
depend on the PC they follow to equip them and keep them fed.
Replacing Cohorts and Followers
If a leader loses a cohort or followers, he can generally replace
them, according to his current Leadership score. It takes time (1d4
months) to recruit replacements. If the leader is to blame for the
deaths of the cohort or followers, it takes extra time to replace
them, up to a full year. Note that the leader also picks up a reputa-
tion of failure, which decreases his Leadership score.
Hirelings
When the PCs need to hire someone to perform a task—make
items, speak with sages, care for their horses, or help build a castle,
hirelings are the NPCs they employ. Characters can use hirelings
to carry torches, tote their treasure, and fight for them. Hirelings
differ from cohorts in that they have no investment in what’s
going on. They just do their jobs.
Unlike cohorts, hirelings do not make decisions. They do as
they’re told (at least in theory). Thus, even if they go on an
adventure with the PCs, they gain no experience and do not
affect any calculations involving the party level. Like cohorts,
hirelings must be treated fairly well, or they will leave and
might even turn against their former employers. Some hirelings
might require hazard pay (perhaps as high as double normal
pay) if placed in particularly dangerous situations. In addition
to demanding hazard pay, hirelings placed in great danger
might be unfriendly (see Influencing NPC Attitudes, page 72 of
the Player ’s Handbook), but characters potentially can influence
them to a better attitude and perhaps even talk them out of
hazard pay.
Hirelings are helpful to have around, particularly for specific
tasks. If the PCs wipe out a nest of wererats but have to leave
treasure behind, they can hire porters to come back down with
them into the lair to help carry out the goods. An animal tender
or two to watch the PCs’ horses while they’re down in a dungeon
can be useful. Mercenary warriors can provide vital additional
strength to the party’s ability to combat foes. 
Middle and high-level PCs should be aware that taking a 1st-
level commoner with them on an adventure so that she can carry
equipment or fight as a mercenary probably places her at great
risk. Hirelings who are expected to fight are best used to deal with
foes of their level—goblin warriors, for instance, or an evil cleric’s
skeleton army.
Table 4–1: Prices for Hireling Services gives an idea of the daily
wage that hirelings of various types will expect or demand. The
prices on the table are for long-term retention of services; hiring
someone for just a day or two might cost two or three times the
indicated price.
Also, the prices do not include materials, tools, or weapons the
hireling may need to do his or her job.
Table 4–1: Prices for Hireling Services
HirelingPer DayHirelingPer Day
Alchemist*1 gpMason/craftsperson*3 sp
Animal tender/groom15 cpMercenary2 sp
Architect/engineer5 spMercenary cavalry4 sp
Barrister1 gpMercenary leader6 sp
Clerk4 spPorter1 sp
Cook1 spSage2 or more gp
Entertainer/performer4 spScribe3 sp
Laborer1 spSmith4 sp*
Limner6 spTeamster3 sp
Maid1 spValet/lackey2 sp
* If paid to create a specific item, use item prices and working times
instead.
The types of hirelings characters might employ (from Table 4–1)
are described below. 
Alchemist:One who works with chemicals. Also includes
apothecaries (those who deal with drugs and medicines).
Animal Tender/Groom:Someone to care for animals. Also
includes shepherds, shearers, and swineherds.
Architect/Engineer:A skilled, educated planner, essential for
large building projects. Also includes shipwrights.
Barrister:A lawyer.
Clerk:A scribe specializing in accounting. Also includes trans-
lators and interpreters.
Cook:Someone who can prepare meals, often for large groups.
Entertainer/Performer:A minstrel, actor, singer, dancer, or
poet.
Laborer:Anyone performing unskilled or relatively unskilled
labor. Includes ditchdiggers, gravediggers, bloomers (forge work-
ers), plowers, quarriers, and many other kinds.
Limner:A painter. Includes all types of artisans.
Maid:A household servant who cleans.
Mason/Craftsperson:A mason is a stoneworker, but this cat-
egory also covers carpenters, tanners (leatherworkers), haberdash-
ers, brewers, coopers, cordwainers (shoemakers), bookbinders,
fletchers, fullers (feltmakers), bowyers, cobblers, drapers, joiners,
parchmentmakers, plasterers, chandlers (candlemakers), dyers,
skinners, soapmakers, jewelers, tinkers, vintners, weavers, gem-
cutters, wheelwrights, cartwrights, horners, mercers, hosiers, and
other individuals who perform a craft.
105
CHAPTER 4:
NONPLAYER
CHARACTERS