224
and thus bypasses the corresponding damage reduction. It deals
an extra 2d6 points of damage against all of chaotic alignment. It
bestows one negative level on any chaotic creature attempting to
wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in
hand and disappears when the weapon is no longer wielded. This
negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be
overcome in any way (including restorationspells) while the
weapon is wielded. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow
the lawful power upon their ammunition.
Moderate evocation [lawful]; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and
Armor, order ’s wrath, creator must be lawful; Price +2 bonus.
Bane:A bane weapon excels at attacking one type or subtype of
creature. Against its designated foe, its effective enhancement
bonus is +2 better than its normal enhancement bonus (so a +1 long-
swordis a +3 longswordagainst its foe). It deals an extra 2d6 points of
damage against the foe. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted
bestow the bane quality upon their ammunition. To randomly
determine a weapon’s designated foe, roll on the following table.
d%Designated Foe
01–05Aberrations
06–09Animals
10–16Constructs
17–22Dragons
23–27Elementals
28–32Fey
33–39Giants
40Humanoids, aquatic
41–42Humanoids, dwarf
43–44Humanoids, elf
45Humanoids, gnoll
46Humanoids, gnome
47–49Humanoids, goblinoid
50Humanoids, halfling
51–54Humanoids, human
55–57Humanoids, reptilian
58–60Humanoids, orc
61–65Magical beasts
66–70Monstrous humanoids
71–72Oozes
73Outsiders, air
74–76Outsiders, chaotic
77Outsiders, earth
78–80Outsiders, evil
81Outsiders, fire
82–84Outsiders, good
85–87Outsiders, lawful
88Outsiders, water
89–90Plants
91–98Undead
99–100Vermin
Moderate conjuration; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
summon monster I; Price +1 bonus.
Brilliant Energy:A brilliant energy weapon has its significant
portion—such as its blade, axe head, or arrowhead—transformed
into light, although this does not modify the item’s weight. It
always gives off light as a torch (20-foot radius). A brilliant energy
weapon ignores nonliving matter. Armor bonuses to AC (includ-
ing any enhancement bonuses to that armor) do not count against
it because the weapon passes through armor. (Dexterity, deflec-
tion, dodge, natural armor, and other such bonuses still apply.) A
brilliant energy weapon cannot harm undead, constructs, and
objects. This property can only be applied to melee weapons,
thrown weapons, and ammunition.
Strong transmutation; CL 16th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
gaseous form, continual flame; Price +4 bonus.
Dancing:As a standard action, a dancing weapon can be loosed
to attack on its own. It fights for 4 rounds using the base attack
bonus of the one who loosed it and then drops. While dancing, it
cannot make attacks of opportunity, and the person who activated
it is not considered armed with the weapon. In all other respects,
it is considered wielded or attended by the creature for all maneu-
vers and effects that target items (such as the sunder action or a
heat metalspell). While dancing, it takes up the same space as the
activating character and can attack adjacent foes (weapons with
reach can attack opponents up to 10 feet away). The dancing
weapon accompanies the person who activated it everywhere,
whether she moves by physical or magical means. If the wielder
who loosed it has an unoccupied hand, she can grasp it while it is
attacking on its own as a free action; when so retrieved the weapon
can’t dance (attack on its own) again for 4 rounds.
Strong transmutation; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
animate objects; Price +4 bonus.
Defending:A defending weapon allows the wielder to transfer
some or all of the sword’s enhancement bonus to his AC as a bonus
that stacks with all others. As a free action, the wielder chooses how to
allocate the weapon’s enhancement bonus at the start of his turn
before using the weapon, and the effect to AC lasts until his next turn.
Moderate abjuration; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
shield orshield of faith; Price +1 bonus.
Disruption: A weapon of disruption is the bane of all undead.
Any undead creature struck in combat must succeed on a DC 14
Will save or be destroyed. A weapon of disruption must be a
bludgeoning weapon. (If you roll this property randomly for a
piercing or slashing weapon, reroll.)
Strong conjuration; CL 14th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
heal; Price +2 bonus.
Distance: This property can only be placed on a ranged
weapon. A weapon of distance has double the range increment of
other weapons of its kind.
Moderate divination; CL 6th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
clairaudience/clairvoyance; Price +1 bonus.
Flaming:Upon command, a flaming weapon is sheathed in
fire. The fire does not harm the wielder. The effect remains until
another command is given. A flaming weapon deals an extra 1d6
points of fire damage on a successful hit. Bows, crossbows, and
slings so crafted bestow the fire energy upon their ammunition.
Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor and
flame blade, flame strike, or fireball; Price +1 bonus.
Flaming Burst: A flaming burst weapon functions as a flaming
weapon that also explodes with flame upon striking a successful
critical hit. The fire does not harm the wielder. In addition to the
extra fire damage from the flaming ability (see above), a flaming
burst weapon deals an extra 1d10 points of fire damage on a suc-
cessful critical hit. If the weapon’s critical multiplier is ×3, add an
extra 2d10 points of fire damage instead, and if the multiplier is
×4, add an extra 3d10 points of fire damage. Bows, crossbows, and
slings so crafted bestow the fire energy upon their ammunition.
Even if the flaming ability is not active, the weapon still deals its
extra fire damage on a successful critical hit.
Strong evocation; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor and
flame blade, flame strike, or fireball; Price +2 bonus.
Frost:Upon command, a frost weapon is sheathed in icy cold.
The cold does not harm the wielder. The effect remains until
another command is given. A frost weapon deals an extra 1d6
points of cold damage on a successful hit. Bows, crossbows, and
slings so crafted bestow the cold energy upon their ammunition.
Moderate evocation; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, chill
metal or ice storm; Price +1 bonus.
Ghost Touch: A ghost touch weapon deals damage normally
against incorporeal creatures, regardless of its bonus. (An incor-
poreal creature’s 50% chance to avoid damage does not apply to
attacks with ghost touch weapons.) The weapon can be picked up
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS