ncounters are to adventures what adventures are to cam-
paigns. Good adventures make up good campaigns. Creat-
ing a campaign is the most difficult, but most rewarding,
task a DM faces.
It’s important to distinguish between a campaign and a
world, since the terms often seem to be used interchangeably. A
campaign is composed of a series of adventures, the nonplayer
characters (NPCs) involved in those adventures, and the events
surrounding everything that happens in those adventures. When
you guide players through adventures you have designed and the
players choose the paths for their characters within those adven-
tures, you are running a campaign.
A world is a fictional place in which a campaign is set. It’s also
often called a campaign setting. A campaign requires a world in
which the action takes place, but whether you create your own
world or use an already established setting, the campaign you run
is always your own.
A campaign generally has the same set of characters (see The
Adventuring Party, below) throughout. They are the link between the
campaign’s adventures. You might think of such a campaign as a series
of novels or movies, with the same characters facing new challenges
that aren’t necessarily related to the challenges that came before.
ESTABLISHING A CAMPAIGN
A campaign first requires a world. A “world” is a consistent envi-
ronment for the campaign. Geography and people are consistent
in the world: Ravensburg is always on the same side of the river,
and the NPCs remember the player characters after the first
meeting. You have two options when it comes to making a world
for your campaign.
•Use  a  Published  Campaign  Setting:  The  advantage  of
using  a  published  setting  is  that  you  don’t  have  to  do  so
much  work.  A  lot  of  the  creation  is  done  for  you,  often
from  the  basics  down  to  the  details.  Of  course,  you  are
always free to pick and choose from the published mate-
rial and use only what you like. One drawback to using
a  published  world  is  that  your  players  might  read  the
same  products  that  you  do  and  might  therefore  know
as  much  (or  more)  about  the  world  as  you  do.  If  this
happens, don’t let the players dictate the world to you.
(“No,  I  think  Ravensburg  is  ruled  by  a  queen.  .  .  .”)
Above  all,  even  if  it’s  a  published  product,  it’s  your
world.
•Create  Your  Own  World:  For  more  information  on
how to do this, see World-Building, page 135.
Once you have a fictional game world and an
adventure for the characters to start with, the cam-
paign can begin. The most important purpose of a
campaign is to make the players feel that their char-
acters live in a real world. This appearance of real-
ism, also called verisimilitude, is important because
it allows the players to stop feeling like they’re play-
ing a game and start feeling more like they’re play-
ing roles. When immersed in their roles, they are
more likely to react to evil Lord Erimbar than they
are to you playing Lord Erimbar.
You will know you have succeeded when the play-
ers ask you increasingly probing questions, questions
not just of the depth of “What’s beyond those
woods?” but such as “If the rangers around the
wood keep such a close watch on the edges of the
129
Illus. by  A. Swekel