paign might have Tiny gnomes or Large half-orcs. You should be
wary of Tiny or Large characters, however, because they alter the
game in significant ways (for example, they take up much less or
much more space in a battle).
Marine: A marine (or coastal or island) version of a common
race might have gills to breathe water, a bonus on Swim checks,
and an affinity with various forms of aquatic wildlife. You should
also be careful not to simply make marine versions of every race
and creature, since this rapidly becomes too predictable.
Desert, Mountain, Forest (Terrain or Climate Types):
Finally, terrain and climate can be the main determinant for a
subrace specially suited for the environment in which it lives
(desert halflings, arctic gnomes, and so on). These subraces differ
from their standard counterparts primarily in skill bonuses or
bonus feats.
Common Subraces
DwarvesElves
Hill dwarves*High elves*
Deep dwarvesAquatic elves (sea elves)
Mountain dwarvesDrow (dark elves)
Duergar (gray dwarves)Gray elves
Wild elves (grugach)
Wood elves (sylvan elves)
GnomesHalflings
Rock gnomes*Lightfeet*
Svirfneblin (deep gnomes)Tallfellows
Forest gnomesDeep halflings
* The standard dwarves, elves, gnomes, and halflings described in the
Player’s Handbook.
Example Subrace: Gold Dwarves
Haughty and proud, the gold dwarves have a civilization approach-
ing the peak of its power. While some are aloof and suspicious, for
the most part they are forthright warriors and shrewd traders.
Racial Traits: Gold dwarves have all the dwarf racial traits
described on page 14 of the Player ’s Handbook,with the following
exceptions.
•+2  Constitution,  –2  Dexterity:  Gold  dwarves  are  stout  and
tough, but not as quick or agile as other races.
•+1  racial  bonus  on  attack  rolls  against  aberrations:  Gold  dwarves
are trained in special combat techniques against these bizarre crea-
tures (this replaces the attack bonus against orcs and goblinoids).
MODIFYING A COMMON RACE
Sometimes you may wish to modify one of the common races
(those described in the Player ’s Handbook). Doing this is different
from creating a subrace, because it’s a change of larger scope—the
entire common race takes on different characteristics. A campaign
might not even use subraces but still have races modified from the
rules presented in the Player ’s Handbook.
The main reason you may want to modify the Player ’s Handbook
races is to give your campaign a unique or a specific feel. For
example, in some campaigns, dwarves never use arcane spells. In
others, they may be wizened masters of the arcane arts.
CHANGES THROUGH ADDITION
AND SUBTRACTION
Modifying a race by adding or subtracting aspects is essentially
like creating a subrace. One DM may find that darkvision is inap-
propriate for dwarves in her campaign, while another believes that
in his campaign elves should never die of old age.
While DMs make such changes to give a unique flavor to a cam-
paign, these changes often end up creating problems with logic or
balance. For example, without darkvision for their dwarves, many
players opt to play a different race instead, and those who do play
dwarves often eventually feel that they made a wrong decision by
not choosing, say, a half-orc. Meanwhile, in the game where the
DM chose to make elves immortal, no actual game balance issues
arise, yet the players grow dissatisfied with the logical incongruity.
If elves don’t die of old age, they ask, why isn’t the world swarming
with them by now? These problems are not insurmountable, but
they show that change must be well thought out. Balance taking an
ability away from a race by replacing it with another. Think
through logic problems, and explain them away with a reasonable
rationale. For example, elves might have an incredibly low birth
rate and fight in many wars against evil, keeping their numbers
low despite their biological immunity to aging.
Example Modified Race: Half-Human Elves
Half-human elves are half-elves raised by elves rather than by
human society.
Half-human elves have all the half-elf racial traits described on
page 18 of the Player ’s Handbook, with the following exceptions.
•Half-human  elves  have  no  racial  bonus  on  Diplomacy  and
Gather Information checks.
•Half-human  elves  have  the  same  weapon  proficiency  as  elves.
They  receive  free  Martial  Weapon  Proficiency  feats  for  the
longsword,  rapier,  shortbow,  and  longbow.  Living  among
people who esteem the arts of swordplay and archery, almost all
half-human elves are familiar with these weapons.
•Favored Class: Wizard. Half-human elves lack some of the flex-
ibility of half-elves who are raised by humans.
CLASS/RACE RESTRICTIONS
The parameters of a campaign can shape the benefits and restric-
tions for playing characters of various races. Sometimes, in order
to reflect specific roles that you want races to play in the cam-
paign, you can restrict which classes each race can choose from.
Limitations might include any or all of the following.
•Dwarves  and  halflings  cannot  be  wizards,  sorcerers,  bards,
monks, druids, paladins, or rangers.
•Elves cannot be druids, paladins, or monks.
•Half-elves cannot be paladins or monks.
•Half-orcs cannot be wizards, bards, druids, paladins, or rangers.
The fighter class, the cleric class, and the rogue class are rarely
restricted. Each is considered available to any race, although you
can of course create your own exceptions.
It is perfectly acceptable for you to say “In my world . . .” and
then describe whatever changes or restrictions you feel necessary.
Be prepared for players to complain if you’re denying something
otherwise granted to them in the Player ’s Handbook for the choices
they make. You’re the DM, and it’s your campaign. It’s important,
however, to make sure that the players understand the explana-
tions behind these changes so that they don’t feel restricted for no
reason. It’s often a good idea to balance restrictions with extra
allowances—such as greater starting money, free skills, or some
other small consideration.
NEW RACES
You can give your players new race options either by using creatures
from the Monster Manual or new creatures of your own design. In
either case, handle this radical change to the campaign with care.
171
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS
VARIANT: NO SIDEBARS FOR VARIANT RULES
In contrast to the way the rest of the Dungeon Master’s Guideis struc-
tured, this chapter is composed of alternative rules, concepts, and ways
of doing things. So, in this chapter, you won’t find variant rules set off
in sidebars—the variant rules are actually the meat of the chapter.
Sidebars  are  used  in  this  chapter  for  “Behind  the  Curtain”  topics,
just as in the rest of the book.
pqqrs
pqqrs