Characters who aren’t buried can dig out their friends. In 1
minute, using only her hands, a character can clear rocks and
debris equal to five times her heavy load limit (see Table 9–1: Car-
rying Capacity, page 162 of the Player ’s Handbook). The amount of
loose stone that fills a 5-foot-by-5-foot area weighs one ton (2,000
pounds). Therefore, the average adventurer (Str 10, heavy load
limit 100 lb.) takes 4 minutes to clear a 5-foot cube filled with
stone (100 lb. ×5 = 500 lb.; 500 lb. ×4 = 2,000 lb.). A half-orc with
20 Strength (heavy load limit 400 lb.) can accomplish the same
feat in 1 minute (400 lb. ×5 = 2,000 lb.). Armed with an appropri-
ate tool, such as a pick, crowbar, or shovel, a digger can clear loose
stone twice as quickly as by hand. You may allow a buried charac-
ter to free himself with a DC 25 Strength check.
ILLUMINATION
Some dungeons are well-lighted, while others are as dark as pitch.
The illumination in a dungeon you create should depend on two
factors: the monsters that inhabit it and your preference as a DM.
Obviously, monsters without any way to see in the dark will
carry light with them or keep the areas they frequent illuminated.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, creatures with blindsight
and tremorsense can often do without light. In general, smart
monsters will keep the lights off if they’re worried about attacks
from humans and other creatures that can’t see in the dark. And
less intelligent monsters may live in the dark simply because they
haven’t mastered the crafts of magic or making fire.
Creatures with 60-foot darkvision fall somewhere between the
two extremes. They have an advantage against creatures without
darkvision if they fight in the dark. On the other hand, few intelli-
gent creatures will willingly live their day-to-day lives in black and
white when a simple torch or 0-level spell would let them see colors.
Many underground civilizations keep “safe” areas lighted, but douse
their lanterns if they’re warned of intruders from the surface world.
Another aspect of darkvision to consider is its limited range.
Creatures who live in a vast underground cavern might have
torches to light the entrance, which otherwise they couldn’t see
because it’s more than 60 feet away from much of the cavern.
Because regular vision extends until it’s blocked, their guards can
see without being seen—a major tactical advantage.
You may want to have combat in the dark sparingly because it can
be frustrating for the players, who spend much of their time guessing
which squares their foes are in. A fight in the darkness is also harder
for you to keep track of, because you have to know where every
unseen foe is. It may be easier for you and the players to simply estab-
lish the convention that in this dungeon, torches are set in sconces
every 40 feet along the walls. But done sparingly and well, a fight in
the darkness can turn into an exciting cat-and-mouse game, in which
characters with good Listen scores really have a chance to shine.
Random Features and Furnishings
Table 3–11: Major Features and Furnishings is a list of large or pre-
dominant features commonly found in dungeons. Use this table
as a feature generator when creating a random dungeon or to
round out one you are creating.
Adventures can also come across small bits and contents of dun-
geon rooms while exploring. Use Table 3–12: Minor Features and
Furnishings to generate these contents randomly, or pick what
appeals to you from the list.
TRAPS
In a dungeon, adventurers can fall to their deaths, be burned alive,
or find themselves peppered with poisoned darts—all without ever
having encountered a single monster. Dungeons tend to be filled
with barriers or life-threatening traps of one kind or another. The
following section describes how traps work, provides a large selec-
tion of sample traps, and offers some basic rules for trap creation.
Types of Traps:A trap can be either mechanical or magic in
nature. Mechanical traps include pits, arrow traps, falling blocks,
water-filled rooms, whirling blades, and anything else that
depends on a mechanism to operate. A mechanical trap can be
constructed by a PC through successful use of the Craft (trapmak-
ing) skill (see Designing a Trap, page 74, and the skill description
on page 70 of the Player ’s Handbook).
Magic traps are further divided into spell  traps and magic
device traps. Magic device traps initiate spell effects when acti-
vated, just as wands, rods, rings, and other magic items do. Creat-
ing a magic device trap requires the Craft Wondrous Item feat (see
Designing  a  Trap,  page  74,  and  the  feat  description  on  page  92  of
the Player ’s Handbook).
Spell traps are simply spells that themselves function as traps,
such as fire trapor glyph of warding.Creating a spell trap requires
the services of a character who can cast the needed spell or spells,
who is usually either the character creating the trap or an NPC
spellcaster hired for the purpose.
MECHANICAL TRAPS
Dungeons are frequently equipped with deadly mechanical (non-
magical) traps, such as hidden crossbows that fire when the target
unwittingly steps on a trigger plate on the floor, or hallways rigged
to collapse in a deadly cave-in. A trap typically is defined by its loca-
tion and triggering conditions, how hard it is to spot before it goes
off, how much damage it deals, and whether or not the heroes
receive a saving throw to mitigate its effects. Traps that attack with
arrows, sweeping blades, and other types of weaponry make normal
attack rolls, with a specific attack bonus dictated by the trap’s design.
Creatures who succeed on a DC 20 Search check detect a simple
mechanical trap before it is triggered. (A simple trap is a snare, a
trap triggered by a tripwire, or a large trap such as a pit.)
A character with the trap sense class feature who succeeds on a
DC 21 (or higher) Search check detects a well-hidden or complex
mechanical trap before it is triggered. Complex traps are denoted
by their triggering mechanisms and involve pressure plates,
mechanisms linked to doors, changes in weight, disturbances in
the air, vibrations, and other sorts of unusual triggers.
MAGIC TRAPS
Many spells can be used to create dangerous traps. For example,
high-level clerics can create glyphs of wardingor symbol spells to
prevent intruders from entering a particular area, while high-level
wizards can create fire trapsor permanent imagesto conceal dangers
or confuse invaders. Unless the spell or item description states
otherwise, assume the following to be true.
•A successful  Search  check  (DC  25  +  spell  level)  made  by  a
rogue (and only a rogue) detects a magic trap before it goes off.
Other  characters  have  no  chance  to  find  a  magic  trap  with  a
Search check.
67
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES
BEHIND THE CURTAIN: TRAPS
Why  use  traps?  Traps  change  the  play  of  the  game.  If  the  adventurers
suspect  traps  or  have  encountered  them  frequently  in  the  past,  they’re
much more likely to be cautious on adventures and particularly in dun-
geons. While instilling a little fear and paranoia in players can be fun, you
should  be  aware  that  this  also  tends  to  slow  down  play,  and  searching
every square foot of a corridor can get tedious for players and DM alike.
The solution is to place traps only when appropriate. Characters and
creatures  put  traps  on  tombs  and  vaults  to  keep  out  intruders,  but
traps  can  be  annoying  and  inappropriate  in  well-traveled  areas.  An
intelligent creature is never going to build a trap that it might fall victim
to itself.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs