ontained within this chapter are a number of options for
PCs and NPCs alike, including alternative ability score
generation systems, new races, and new classes. Also pro-
vided here are rules for improving characters, new famil-
iars, and epic characters.
ABILITY SCORES
In addition to the standard method for generating ability scores
presented in the Player ’s Handbook(roll 4d6, discard the lowest die,
and arrange as desired), here are eight options you might want to
consider using in your campaign.
1. Standard Point Buy:All ability scores start at 8. Take 25
points to spread out among all abilities. For ability scores of 14 or
lower, you buy additional points on a 1-for-1 basis. For ability
scores higher than 14, it costs a little more (see the table below).
This method allows for maximum customization, but you should
expect each PC to have at least one really good score.
Ability Score Point Costs
AbilityPointAbilityPoint
ScoreCostScoreCost
9114 6
102158
1131610
1241713
1351816
2. Nonstandard Point Buy:Use the standard point buy
method, except that the player has fewer or more points for
buying scores, as shown on the table below.
Type of CampaignPoints Allowed
Low-powered campaign15 points
Challenging campaign22 points
Tougher campaign28 points
High-powered campaign32 points
3. Elite Array:Use the following scores, arranged as
desired: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, and 8. These numbers (assuming
they’re assigned to abilities in an appropriate way) pro-
duce characters with at least a decent score in every abil-
ity that’s important to the character’s class. This method
is faster than the standard point buy method and is good
for creating characters quickly. In fact, it’s the method
we used to generate ability scores for the sample NPCs
in Chapter 4 of this book.
4. The Floating Reroll: Roll 4d6 six times, discard-
ing the lowest die each time. Once during this process,
the player can reroll the lowest die instead. Arrange
scores as desired. This method results in slightly
better characters than the standard Player ’s Handbook
method does, allowing players to either improve a
particularly bad score or try to get a very good score.
For example, if the player rolled 4d6 and got results
of 1, 2, 6, and 6 for a score of 14, she might choose to
reroll the 1 to see if she could improve the score
(and possibly even get an 18 if the reroll came up 6).
5. Organic Characters:Roll 4d6 six times, discard-
ing the lowest die each time. Place in order (Str, Dex,
Con, Int, Wis, Cha) as rolled. Reroll any one ability
score of your choice, taking the new roll if it’s
higher. Then switch any two ability scores. This
169
Illus. by  A. Swekel