32
Riding a mount doesn’t normally require rolls. Only riding into
difficult terrain or performing a specific task involving riding
requires a roll.
Tracking: Soveliss is following a giant scorpion across the
desert. He follows the vermin for 3 miles, making a Survival
check each mile, but tracking in the soft sand is easy. Shortly after
the third mile, a windstorm comes up. Soveliss waits it out, and it
passes after an hour. Now he must make a fourth check to see if
he can pick up the trail in the wind-tossed sand. This check is of
course more difficult than the earlier ones, as are all subsequent
checks until the tracker gets to the place where the scorpion was
when the storm passed.
Normally, tracking requires a Survival check each mile, but a
sudden change in situation can require an additional roll.
Sneaking: Lidda is sneaking through a dungeon filled with
hobgoblins. She must pass by an open doorway beyond which is
a room where the brutes are drinking from a keg of ale. She
makes a Move Silently check, and the hobgoblins make opposed
Listen checks, but they’re not paying much attention, so the half-
ling sneaks by easily. The hobgoblins aren’t even looking at the
door, so no Hide check is required. To get out, however, she must
pass right through a guard room. She must make a Hide check to
keep to the dark shadows near the walls, and a new Move
Silently check (new because the listeners are different individu-
als, plus they’re more alert) to get past the guards and through
the room.
A new Move Silently check is needed for each different group
that a sneaker is trying to avoid. Sometimes both a Move Silently
check and a Hide check are needed when sneaking around. Some-
times they’re not.
GENERAL VERSUS SPECIFIC
Sometimes a player will say, “I look around the room. Do I see
anything?” and sometimes she’ll say, “I look into the room,
knowing that I just saw a kobold dart inside. I look behind the
chair and the table, and in all the dark corners. Do I see it?” In
both cases, the DM replies, “Make a Spot check.” However, in
the second example, the character has specialized knowledge of
the situation. She’s asking specific questions. In such cases,
always award the character a +2 bonus for favorable conditions.
It’s good to reward a character who has knowledge that allows
her to ask specific questions.
If the kobold’s actually not in the room, but a cloaker waits in
ambush on the ceiling, the character has no special knowledge
and gains no bonus. She doesn’t get a penalty, either—don’t
penalize specific questions. If both the kobold and the cloaker
are in the room, two Spot checks are required (unless the mon-
sters are working together as a group, which is highly unlikely).
The character gets a +2 bonus on the check to spot the kobold
and no bonus on the check to spot the cloaker.
DEGREES OF SUCCESS
When determining how much information a skill check or abil-
ity check gives a character, the degree of success is important to
the task. For example, an invisible assassin sneaks up on a cleric.
The cleric makes a Listen check opposed by the assassin’s Move
Silently check, and the cleric is successful. You could describe
this success to the player of the cleric in many different ways,
including these.
•“You  heard  a  noise  and  you  know  something’s  out  there,  but
you don’t see anything.”
•“You  heard  a  noise.  It  sounded  like  a  person  moving,  and  it
came from ‘over there.’ ”
•“You  heard  a  noise.  You  know  there’s  an  invisible  creature
about  15  feet  northeast  of  you,  and  you  can  target  that  crea-
ture’s location with an attack.”
To determine how much information to give out, compare
the opposed check results (or for a nonopposed check, the
check result and the DC). In the example above, you give the
first answer if the check merely succeeds on the check. If the
cleric beats the assassin’s check result by 10 or more, he has
achieved a greater success, and he gets the second answer. If he
exceeds  the  assassin’s  check  result  by  20  or  more,  he  has
achieved a perfect success, and he gets all the information—the
third answer.
Degrees of success usually only apply when the amount of
information you have to give out can be different depending on
how well the character succeeds. Most of the time, the only out-
come that matters is whether the character succeeds or fails.
DEGREES OF FAILURE
Usually failure itself is a sufficient problem and does not need to
be compounded. However, failure can sometimes cause addi-
tional problems, such as a setting off a trap or alerting a sentry to
the characters’ presence. When such consequences exist, a check
that fails by 5 or more causes them to occur. For example, if
Lidda the rogue misses a Disable Device check by 5 or more, she
sets off the trap she’s trying to disable.
Skills that carry an additional risk on a failed
check include the following. Other risks on a
failure may apply, at your discretion.
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
Incorporeal wraiths
lunge toward 
an adventurer.
Illus. by  S. Fischer