6
are more likely to join in the hobby for the long haul. Use this
opportunity to encourage new players to become the sort of
people you want to game with.
Here are a few pointers on teaching the game.
Read the Player ’s Handbookand know the character creation
rules so you can help new players build characters. Have each of
the newcomers tell you what sort of character he or she wants to
play and then show them how they can create those heroes with
the D&D rules. If they don’t know what to play, show them the
player character races and classes in the Player ’s Handbook,briefly
describe each, and let them choose the one that appeals to them
the most. Another option is to keep a few simple characters
(such as a 1st-level fighter or rogue) around for newcomers.
Advance those characters in level as the party advances. and
you’ll have “old friends” who adventure with the party when
newcomers play them.
Once the PCs are created, don’t worry about teaching the play-
ers all the rules ahead of time. All they truly need to know are the
basics that apply to understanding their characters (how spells
work, what AC means, how to use skills, and so forth), and they
can pick up most of this information as they go along. Remember
the most basic rule: To attack, make a saving throw, or use a skill,
roll a d20 and hope for a high number.
As long as you know the rules, the players need be concerned
only with their characters and how they react to what happens to
them in the game. Have players tell you what they want their char-
acters to do, and translate that into game terms for them. Teach
them how the rules work when they need to learn them, on a case-
by-case basis. For example, if the player of a wizard wants to cast a
spell or the player of a fighter wants to attack, the player tells you
what the character is attempting. Then you tell the player which
modifier or modifiers to add to the roll of a d20, and what happens
as a result. After a few times, the player will know what to do with-
out asking.
PROVIDING THE WORLD
Every Dungeon Master is the creator of his or her own campaign
world. Whether you use the G
REYHAWK
® setting (the standard
D&D campaign setting) or another published setting for the D&D
game, such as the F
ORGOTTEN
R
EALMS®Campaign Setting, it’s still
your world.
The setting is more than just a backdrop for adventures, al-
though it’s that too. The setting is everything in the fictional world
except for the PCs and the adventure plot. A well-designed and
well-run world seems to go on around the PCs, so that they feel a
part of something, instead of apart from it. Though the PCs are
powerful and important, they should seem to be residents of some
fantasy world that is ultimately larger than they are.
Consistency is the key to a believable fictional world. When the
PCs go back into town for supplies, they ought to encounter some
of the same NPCs they saw before. Soon, they’ll learn the bar-
keep’s name—and she’ll remember theirs as well. Once you have
achieved this degree of consistency, however, provide an occa-
sional change. If the PCs come back to buy more horses at the sta-
bles, you could have them discover that the man who ran the place
went back home to the large city over the hills, and now his
nephew runs the family business. That sort of change—one that
has nothing to do with the PCs directly, but one that they’ll
notice—makes the players feel as though they’re adventuring in a
living world as real as themselves, not just a flat backdrop that
exists only for them to delve its dungeons.
For much more on running a campaign, see Chapter 5.
ADJUDICATING
When everyone gathers around the table to play the game, you’re
in charge. That doesn’t mean you can tell people what to do out-
side the boundaries of the game, but it does mean that you’re the
final arbiter of the rules within the game. Good players will always
recognize that you have ultimate authority over the game mechan-
ics, even superseding something in a rulebook. Good DMs know
not to change or overturn a published rule without a good, logical
justification so that the players don’t rebel (more on that later).
To carry out this responsibility, you need to know the rules.
You’re not required to memorize the rulebooks, but you should
have a clear idea of what’s in them, so that when a situation comes
up that requires a ruling, you know where to reference the proper
rule in the book.
Often a situation will arise that isn’t explicitly covered by the
rules. In such a situation, you need to provide guidance as to how
it should be resolved. When you come upon a situation that the
rules don’t seem to cover, consider the following courses of action.
•Look to any similar situation that iscovered in a rulebook. Try
to extrapolate from what you see presented there and apply it to
the current circumstance.
•If  you  have  to  make  something  up,  stick  with  it  for  the  rest  of
the  campaign.  (This  is  called  a  house  rule.)  Consistency  keeps
players satisfied and gives them the feeling that they adventure
in  a  stable,  predictable  universe  and  not  in  some  random,
nonsensical place subject only to the DM’s whims.
•When  in  doubt,  remember  this  handy  little  rule:  Favorable
conditions  add  +2  to  any  d20  roll,  and  unfavorable  conditions
penalize the roll by –2. You’ll be surprised how often this “DM’s
best friend” will solve problems.
If you come upon an apparent contradiction in the rules, con-
sider these factors when adjudicating.
•A rule found in a rulebook overrules one found in a published
adventure,  unless  the  rule  presented  in  the  published  adven-
ture deals with something specific and limited to the adventure
itself.
•Choose the rule that you like the best, then stick with it for the
rest  of  the  campaign.  Consistency  is  a  critical  aspect  of  rules
adjudication.
PROPELLING THE GAME EVER FORWARD
While all the players are responsible for contributing to the game,
the onus must ultimately fall upon the DM to keep the game
moving, maintain player interest, and keep things fun. Remember
that keeping things moving is always more important than search-
ing through rulebooks to find the exact details on some point or
spending time in long debates over rules decisions.
Even a well-run game can bog down sometimes. Perhaps the
players have been at it a while and are growing a little tired of the
same old thing. Maybe a playing session falls flat for no apparent
reason. Sometimes this can’t be helped—you’re only human. In
fact, occasionally you will find it’s better to cancel a playing ses-
sion or cut it short rather than have a poor experience that may set
back the whole campaign.
However, an average playing session can be turned into a mem-
orable one, or a poor session can be spiced up. For example, props
can bring new life to a game. You can make fake parchment from
normal paper, “aging” it by wetting it slightly with coffee or tea
and then letting it dry to an uneven yellow. Toss in a few creases or
small rips, and later when the PCs find a map or a message you can
actually hand it to them. Old coins, tarot cards, a battered book in
a foreign language, and the like all make wonderful handouts to
get players into the spirit of the game.
Another kind of visual aid is artwork. In all D&D game prod-
ucts, you’ll find wonderful fantasy illustrations. Look through
those products, or find a book cover or some other art source to
provide you with a picture that fits something the PCs will
encounter. Then, when the encounter comes to pass, pull out the
picture and say, “ This is what you see.” While players’ imagina-
tions are fertile, sometimes seeing a depiction of something they
encounter in the game—a character, a monster, or a place—
CHAPTER 1:
RUNNING 
THE GAME