8
In such a game, let the PCs face mostly clearly evil monsters
and opponents and meet clearly good helpful NPCs (occasion-
ally). Don’t expect PCs to anguish over what to do with prisoners,
or whether it’s right or wrong to invade and wipe out the bugbear
lair. Don’t bother too much with money or time spent in town. Do
whatever it takes to get the PCs back into the action as quickly as
possible. Character motivation need be no more developed than a
desire to kill monsters and acquire treasure.
Rules and game balance are very important in this style of play.
If some characters have combat ability greater than that of their
fellows, unfair situations may develop in which the players of the
overpowered characters can handle more of the challenges and
thus have more fun. If you’re using this style, be very careful about
adjudicating rules and think long and hard about additions or
changes to the rules before making them.
DEEP-IMMERSION STORYTELLING
The Free City of Greyhawk is threatened by political turmoil. The
PCs must convince the members of the ruling council to resolve
their differences, but can only do so after they have come to terms
with their own differing outlooks and agendas. This style of gam-
ing is deep, complex, and challenging. The focus isn’t on combat
but on talking, developing in-depth personas, and character inter-
action. A whole game session may pass without a single die roll.
In this style of game, the NPCs should be as complex and richly
detailed as the PCs—although the focus should be on motivation
and personality, not game statistics. Expect long digressions from
each player about what his or her character will do, and why.
Going to a store to buy iron rations and rope can be as important
an encounter as fighting orcs. (And don’t expect the PCs to fight
the orcs at all unless their characters are motivated to do so.) A
character will sometimes take actions against his player’s better
judgment, because “that’s what the characterwould do.” Adven-
tures in this style of play deal mostly with negotiations, political
maneuverings, and character interaction. Players talk about the
“story” that they are collectively creating.
Rules become less important in this style. Since combat isn’t the
focus, game mechanics take a back seat to character development.
Skill modifiers take precedence over combat bonuses, and even
then the actual numbers often don’t mean much. Feel free to
change rules to fit the player’s roleplaying needs. You may even
want to streamline the combat system so that it takes less time
away from the story.
SOMETHING IN BETWEEN
The style of play in most campaigns is going to fall between the two
extremes just described. There’s plenty of action, but there’s a story-
line and interaction between characters as well. Players will develop
their characters, but they’ll be eager to get into a fight. Provide a nice
mixture of roleplaying encounters and combat encounters. Even in
a dungeon, you can present NPCs that aren’t meant to be fought but
rather helped out, negotiated with, or just talked to.
OTHER STYLE CONSIDERATIONS
A few other style-related issues are worth your consideration.
Serious versus Humorous: How seriously you take things
sets the standard for how seriously the players take things. Jokes
and silly remarks can make the game more fun, but they can also
detract from the action. If you make funny comments during the
game, expect that the players will, too.
Likewise, if you design adventures that are lighthearted, create
NPCs that are slightly silly, or introduce embarrassing or humor-
ous situations into the game, realize that it changes the tenor of
the game. If the king of the land is a talking dog named Muffy or
if the PCs have to find abrassiere of elemental summoningrather
than a brazier of elemental summoning, don’t expect anyone to take
the game too seriously.
Overall, it’s recommended that you play things straight. Don’t
intentionally insert jokes into the game. There’ll be enough josh-
ing around at the table already to keep the game fun. The in-game
action should remain fairly serious (although an occasional funny
moment is fine).
Naming Conventions:Related to how serious or humorous
the game is, character names should be fairly uniform in style
throughout the group. Although any character name is fine in and
of itself, a group that includes characters named Bob the Fighter,
Aldorius Killraven of Thistledown, and Runtboy lacks the consis-
tency to be credible.
Multiple Characters:You need to decide if each player is
going to be limited to one character or can have more than one,
and whether a player is allowed to actually run more than one
character at the same time. Generally, it’s best if you keep to one
character per player. However, when players are few, you might
allow them to run more than one character just to get the group
size up to at least four characters.
THE BOTTOM LINE
You’re in charge. This is not being in charge as in telling everyone
what to do. Rather, you get to decide how your player group is
going to play this game, when and where the adventures take
place, and what happens. That kind of being in charge.
EXAMPLE OF PLAY
A DM guides four players through their first adventure. The play-
ers are playing Tordek (a dwarf fighter), Mialee (an elf wizard),
Jozan (a human cleric), and Lidda (a halfling rogue). These four
adventurers seek the ruins of an abandoned monastery, drawn by
rumors of a fabulous fire opal, supposedly hidden there by the
abbot when the place was attacked.
After passing through the lifeless aboveground ruins of the mon-
astery, the adventurers find a rubble-strewn staircase leading down. 
Tordek: Let’s give these upper ruins one more quick look.
DM: [Making some rolls in secret, but knowing there’s nothing to find
in the burned-out shell of the monastery.] You don’t find anything.
What are you going to do now?
Jozan: Let’s go down!
Lidda: We’ll light a torch first.
DM: Fine, but I’ll need the marching order that you’ll be in.
At this point, the players arrange their miniature figures, each repre-
senting one character, in the order in which they will march down the
stairs (and walk down corridors, and enter rooms). Tordek goes first, fol-
lowed by Jozan (with the torch), then Mialee. Lidda brings up the rear, her
player noting that she will be watching behind them occasionally.
If the players didn’t have miniatures, writing down the marching order
on a piece of paper would suffice.
Tordek: Fortunately, the torchlight won’t spoil my darkvision—
that’ll help us navigate in the dark down there.
Jozan: Okay, we go down the stairs.
DM: You descend southward, possibly 30 feet laterally, and at
the end of the stairway you see an open space.
Tordek: I enter and look around.
Jozan: I come in behind with the torch.
DM: You are in a chamber about 30 feet across to the south and
30 feet wide east and west. You see 10-foot-wide passages to the left
and right as well as straight ahead, each in the center of its respec-
tive wall. Looking back, you see the stairway by which you entered
the chamber in the center of the north wall.
Lidda: What else do we see?
DM: The floor is rough and damp. The ceiling is supported by
arches that probably rise to meet in the center, about 20 feet above
you—it’s hard to tell because of all the webs. Some moldering old
sacks are lying in the southwest corner, and some rubbish is jum-
CHAPTER 1:
RUNNING 
THE GAME