ters can move in any direction as if they were flying with perfect
maneuverability.
Stealth and Detection Underwater: How far you can see
underwater depends on the water’s clarity. As a guideline, crea-
tures can see 4d8×10 feet if the water is clear, and 1d8×10 feet if it’s
murky. Moving water is always murky, unless it’s in a particularly
large, slow-moving river.
It’s hard to find cover or concealment to hide underwater
(except along the seafloor). Listen and Move Silently checks func-
tion normally underwater.
Invisibility: An invisible creature displaces water and leaves a
visible, body-shaped “bubble” where the water was displaced. The
creature still has concealment (20% miss chance), but not total
concealment (50% miss chance).
Underwater Combat
Land-based creatures can have considerable
difficulty when fighting in water. Water
affects a creature’s Armor Class, attack
rolls, damage, and move-
ment. In some cases
a  creature’s  oppo-
nents may get a
bonus on attacks.
The effects are sum-
marized   in   the
accompanying
table. They apply
whenever a charac-
ter  is  swimming,
walking  in  chest-
deep water, or walk-
ing along the bottom.
Ranged    Attacks
Underwater:Thrown
weapons are ineffective
underwater, even when
launched  from  land.
Attacks  with  other
ranged weapons take a –2
penalty on attack rolls for
every 5 feet of water they pass
through, in addition to the
normal penalties for range.
Attacks from Land: Char-
acters swimming, floating, or
treading water on the surface, or
wading in water at least chest deep, have improved cover (+8 bonus
to AC, +4 bonus on Reflex saves) from opponents on land. Land-
bound opponents who have freedom of movementeffects ignore this
cover when making melee attacks against targets in the water. A
completely submerged creature has total cover against opponents
on land unless those opponents have freedom of movement effects.
Magical effects are unaffected except for those that require attack
rolls (which are treated like any other effects) and fire effects.
Fire: Nonmagical fire (including alchemist’s fire) does not
burn underwater. Spells or spell-like effects with the fire de-
scriptor are ineffective underwater unless the caster makes a
Spellcraft check (DC 20 + spell level). If the check succeeds, the
spell creates a bubble of steam instead of its usual fiery effect, but
otherwise the spell works as described. A supernatural fire effect
is ineffective underwater unless its description states otherwise.
The surface of a body of water blocks line of effect for any fire
spell. If the caster has made a Spellcraft check to make the fire
spell usable underwater, the surface still blocks the spell’s line of
effect. For example, a fireballcast underwater cannot be targeted at
creatures above the surface.
Floods
In many wilderness areas, river floods are a common occurrence.
In spring, an enormous snowmelt can engorge the streams and
rivers it feeds. Other catastrophic events such as massive rain-
storms or the destruction of a dam can create floods as well.
During a flood, rivers become wider, deeper, and swifter. As-
sume that a river rises by 1d10+10 feet during the spring flood,
and its width increases by a factor of 1d4×50%. Fords may disap-
pear for days, bridges may be swept away, and even ferries might
not be able to manage the crossing of a flooded river.
A river in flood makes Swim checks one category harder (calm
water becomes rough, and rough water becomes stormy). Rivers
also become 50% swifter.
WEATHER
Sometimes weather can play an
important  role  in  an  adven-
ture—rain  can  wash  away
tracks, a thunderstorm can
force the adventurers to seek
shelter, or a gale can delay
their ship from sailing.
If your adventure involves
spending a lot of time out-
doors, create a random table
to determine the weather
conditions in a particular
area.   Local   conditions
have a dramatic effect on
weather. High-altitude
areas  are  often  much
colder than lowlands,
for  example.  The
presence of a moun-
tain range can cause
an area adjacent to
the   mountains
where little pre-
cipitation falls.
Table 3–23: Ran-
dom Weather is
an appropriate
weather   table
for general use,
and you can use it as the basis for
your own weather tables. Terms on that table are
defined as follows.
Calm:Wind speeds are light (0 to 10 mph).
Cold: Between 0° and 40° Fahrenheit during the day, 10 to 20
degrees colder at night.
Cold Snap:Lowers temperature by –10° F.
Downpour:Treat as rain (see Precipitation, below), but conceals as
fog. Can create floods (see above). A downpour lasts for 2d4 hours.
Heat Wave:Raises temperature by +10° F.
Hot:Between 85° and 110° Fahrenheit during the day, 10 to 20
degrees colder at night.
Moderate:Between 40° and 60° Fahrenheit during the day, 10
to 20 degrees colder at night.
Powerful Storm(Windstorm/Blizzard/Hurricane/Tornado):
Wind speeds are over 50 mph (see Table 3–24: Wind Effects). In
addition, blizzards are accompanied by heavy snow (1d3 feet), and
hurricanes are accompanied by downpours (see above). Wind-
storms last for 1d6 hours. Blizzards last for 1d3 days. Hurricanes
can last for up to a week, but their major impact on characters will
come in a 24-to-48-hour period when the center of the storm
moves through their area. Tornadoes are very short-lived (1d6×10
minutes), typically forming as part of a thunderstorm system.
93
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES