that protect all the citizens of the city. Having an evil alignment is
not a crime (except in some severely theocratic cities, perhaps,
with the magical power to back up the law); only evil deeds are
against the law. Even when adventurers encounter an evildoer in
the act of perpetrating some heinous evil upon the populace of
the city, the law tends to frown on the sort of vigilante justice that
leaves the evildoer dead or otherwise unable to testify at a trial.
The important point to remember about city laws when run-
ning a city campaign is to use them to encourage creative thinking
and alternative ways of solving problems. If the players stop
having fun and long for a return to the dungeon, where they can
use their combat might to its fullest potential, it’s generally a good
idea to cut them some slack where the city laws are concerned,
and let them focus on the exciting aspects of adventure in the city.
On the other hand, if your players in a city-centered campaign
make feat, skill, and spell selections in order to optimize their
characters’ effectiveness in working within and around the law,
then they are approaching the problem creatively and deserve the
chance to try out their schemes.
WEAPON AND SPELL RESTRICTIONS
Some cities demand that characters who enter the city bind their
weapons into their sheaths with knotted cord to prevent easy access.
Other cities may forbid enchantments or divinations such asdetect
thoughtsin the bazaar. Different cities have different laws about such
issues as carrying weapons in public and restricting spellcasters.
When you plan an urban adventure, decide what the relevant laws are.
The most important consideration is to enhance the game with
such laws, not interfere with the players’ fun. While it might be
quite logical for a city to confiscate weapons and material compo-
nents, such restrictions can really put a damper on player enjoy-
ment of an urban adventure. If you want to increase the challenge
of urban life by forcing characters to make do without weapons or
spells, that’s fine—but be sure that the challenges they face are
appropriate to their hindered state. Unless you’ve accounted for
the restrictions in your adventure, it’s best if the characters have
relatively free access to all their capabilities.
The city’s laws may not affect all characters equally. A monk isn’t
hampered at all by a law about peace-bonding weapons, but a
cleric is reduced to a fraction of his power if all holy symbols are
confiscated at the city’s gates.
At the same time, it’s a good idea to let characters who are
resourceful or clever enough get around such restrictions—such
as the wizard with the Eschew Materials feat who doesn’t need
material components or the bard with a rapier concealed in the
neck of his lute.
URBAN FEATURES
Walls, doors, poor lighting, and uneven footing: In many ways a city
is much like a dungeon. Many of the dungeon terrain elements
described earlier in this chapter work equally well in the city. Some
new considerations for an urban setting are covered below.
Walls and Gates
Many cities are surrounded by walls. A typical small city wall is a
fortified stone wall 5 feet thick and 20 feet high. Such a wall is
fairly smooth, requiring a DC 30 Climb check to scale. The walls
are crenellated on one side to provide a low wall for the guards
atop it, and there is just barely room for guards to walk along the
top of the wall.
A typical small city wall has AC 3, hardness 8, and 450 hp per
10-foot section.
A typical large city wall is 10 feet thick and 30 feet high, with
crenellations on both sides for the guards on top of the wall. It is
likewise smooth, requiring a DC 30 Climb check to scale.
Such a wall has AC 3, hardness 8, and 720 hp per 10-foot section.
A typical metropolis wall is 15 feet thick and 40 feet tall. It has
crenellations on both sides and often has a tunnel and small
rooms running through its interior.
Metropolis walls have AC 3, hardness 8, and 1,170 hp per 10-
foot section.
Unlike smaller cities, metropolises often have interior walls as well
as surrounding walls—either old walls that the city has outgrown, or
walls dividing individual districts from each other. Sometimes these
walls are as large and thick as the outer walls, but more often they
have the characteristics of a large city’s or small city’s walls.
Watch Towers: Some city walls are adorned with watch towers
set at irregular intervals. Few cities have enough guards to keep
someone constantly stationed at every tower, unless the city is
expecting attack from outside. The towers provide a superior view
of the surrounding countryside as well as a point of defense
against invaders.
Watch towers are typically 10 feet higher than the wall they
adjoin, and their diameter is 5 times the thickness of the wall.
Arrow slits line the outer sides of the upper stories of a tower, and
the top is crenellated like the surrounding walls are. In a small
tower (25 feet in diameter adjoining a 5-foot-thick wall), a simple
ladder typically connect the tower’s stories and the roof. In a larger
tower, stairs serve that purpose.
Heavy wooden doors, reinforced with iron and bearing good
locks (Open Lock DC 30), block entry to a tower, unless the tower
is in regular use.
As a rule, the captain of the guard keeps the key to the tower
secured on her person, and a second copy is in the city’s inner
fortress or barracks.
Gates:A typical city gate is a gatehouse with two portcullises
and murder holes above the space between them.
In towns and some small cities, the primary entry is through
iron double doors set into the city wall.
Gates are usually open during the day and locked or barred at
night. Usually, one gate lets in travelers after sunset and is staffed
by guards who will open it for someone who seems honest, pres-
ents proper papers, or offers a large enough bribe (depending on
the city and the guards).
Guards and Soldiers
A city typically has full-time military personnel equal to 1% of its
adult population, in addition to militia or conscript soldiers equal
to 5% of the population. The full-time soldiers are city guards re-
sponsible for maintaining order within the city, similar to the role
of modern police, and (to a lesser extent) for defending the city
from outside assault. Conscript soldiers are called up to serve in
case of an attack on the city.
A typical city guard force works on three eight-hour shifts, with
30% of the force on a day shift (8 
A.
M.to 4 P.M.), 35% on an evening
shift (4 
P
.
M.to 12 A.M.), and 35% on a night shift (12 A.M.to 8 A.M.).
At any given time, 80% of the guards on duty are on the streets
patrolling, while the remaining 20% are stationed at various posts
throughout the city, where they can respond to nearby alarms. At
least one such guard post is present within each neighborhood of
a city (each neighborhood consisting of several districts).
The majority of a city guard force is made up of warriors, mostly
1st level. Officers include higher-level warriors, fighters, a fair
number of clerics, and wizards or sorcerers, as well as multiclass
fighter/spellcasters. 
Siege Engines
Siege engines are large weapons, temporary structures, or pieces
of equipment traditionally used in besieging a castle or fortress.
Catapult, Heavy: A heavy catapult is a massive engine capable of
throwing rocks or heavy objects with great force. Because the cata-
pult throws its payload in a high arc, it can hit squares out of its line
of sight. To fire a heavy catapult, the crew chief makes a special check
against DC 15 using only his base attack bonus, Intelligence modi-
99
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES