Sylvan Scimitar: This +3 scimitar,when used outdoors in a tem-
perate climate, grants its wielder the use of the Cleave feat and
deals an extra 1d6 points of damage.
Moderate evocation; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
divine poweror creator must be a 7th-level druid; Price 47,315gp;
Cost 23,657 gp and 5 sp + 1,893 XP.
Trident of Fish Command:The magical properties of this+1
trident with a 6-foot-long haft enable its wielder to charm up to 14
HD of aquatic animals (Will DC 16 negates, animals get a +5 bonus
if currently under attack by the wielder or his
allies), no two of which can be more than 30 feet
apart. The wielder can use this effect up to
three times per day. The wielder can commu-
nicate with the animals as if using a speak
with animalsspell. Animals making their
saving throw are free of control, but they
will not approach within 10 feet of the tri-
dent. The trident can be used up to three
times per day.
Moderate enchantment; CL 7th; Craft
Magic Arms and Armor, speak with ani-
mals; Price 18,650 gp; Cost 9,325 gp +
746 XP.
Trident of Warning:A weapon of
this type enables its wielder to deter-
mine  the  location,  depth,  kind,  and
number of aquatic predators within 680
feet. A trident of warningmust be grasped
and pointed in order for the character
using it to gain such information, and it
requires 1 round to scan a hemisphere with
a radius of 680 feet. The weapon is other-
wise a +2 trident.
Moderate  divination; CL  7th;  Craft
Magic Arms and Armor, locate creature;
Price 10,115 gp; Cost 5,057 gp and 5 sp +
405 XP.
POTIONS AND OILS
A potion is a magic liquid that produces its
effect when imbibed. Magic oils are similar to
potions, except that oils are applied externally
rather than imbibed. A potion or oil can be used only once. It can
duplicate the effect of a spell of up to 3rd level that has a casting
time of less than 1 minute.
Potions are like spells cast upon the imbiber. The character
taking the potion doesn’t get to make any decisions about the ef-
fect—the caster who brewed the potion has already done so. For
example, a potion of protection from energyis always designed to pro-
tect against a specific energy type chosen by the creator, not the
drinker. The drinker of a potion is both the effective target and the
caster of the effect (though the potion indicates the caster level,
the drinker still controls the effect, such as with levitate).
The person applying an oil is the effective caster, but the object
is the target. When a character applies oil of speak with dead, the
character is the one asking the questions.
Physical Description: A typical potion or oil consists of 1
ounce of liquid held in a ceramic or glass vial fitted with a tight
stopper. The stoppered container is usually no more than 1 inch
wide and 2 inches high. The vial has AC 13, 1 hit point, hardness 1,
and a break DC of 12. Vials hold 1 ounce of liquid.
Identifying Potions:In addition to the standard methods of
identification, PCs can sample from each container they find to
attempt to determine the nature of the liquid inside. An experi-
enced  character  learns  to  identify  potions  by  memory—for
example, the last time she tasted a liquid that reminded her of
almonds, it turned out to be a potion of cure moderate wounds. (You can
reward players who keep records of potion sampling by always
having the same type of potion taste the same—or you can cross
them up by occasionally having the almond-flavored potion be
something other than a potion of cure moderate wounds.)
Activation:Drinking a potion or applying an oil requires no spe-
cial skill. The user merely removes the stopper and swallows the
potion or smears on the oil. The following rules govern potion and
oil use.
Drinking a potion or using an oil on an item of gear is a standard
action. The potion or oil takes effect immediately.
Using a potion or oil provokes attacks of opportu-
nity. A successful attack (including grappling
attacks) against the character forces a Concen-
tration check (as for casting a spell). If the char-
acter fails this check, she cannot drink the
potion. An enemy may direct an attack of op-
portunity against the potion or oil container
rather than against the character. A successful
attack of this sort can destroy the container (see
page 165 of the Player ’s Handbook).
A creature must be able to swallow a potion or
smear on an oil. Because of this, incorporeal crea-
tures cannot use potions or oils.
Any corporeal creature can imbibe a potion.
The potion must be swallowed. Any corporeal
creature can use an oil.
A character can carefully administer a potion to
an unconscious creature as a full-round action,
trickling the liquid down the creature’s throat.
Likewise, it takes a full-round action to apply an
oil to an unconscious creature.
Random Generation:To generate potions
and oils randomly, roll on Table 7–17: Potions
and Oils (see the following page).
Potion Descriptions
Because standard potions are simply spells in
liquid form, refer to the spell description in
the Player ’s Handbookfor all pertinent details.
The caster level for a standard potion is the
minimum caster level needed to cast the spell
(unless otherwise specified).
RINGS
Rings bestow magical powers upon their wearers. Only a rare few
have charges. Anyone can use a ring.
A character can only effectively wear two magic rings. A third
magic ring doesn’t work if the wearer is already wearing two
magic rings.
Physical Description:Rings have no appreciable weight. Al-
though exceptions exist that are crafted from glass or bone, the
vast majority of rings are forged from metal—usually precious
metals such as gold, silver, and platinum. A ring has AC 13, 2 hit
points, hardness 10, and a break DC of 25.
Activation:Usually, a ring’s ability is activated by a command
word (a standard action that does not provoke attacks of opportu-
nity) or it works continually. Some rings have exceptional activa-
tion methods, according to their descriptions.
Random Generation:To generate rings randomly, roll on
Table 7–18: Rings (see page 231).
Special Qualities:Roll d%. A result of 01 indicates the ring is
intelligent, 02–31 indicates that something (a design, inscription, or
the like) provides a clue to its function, and 32–100 indicates no spe-
cial qualities. Intelligent items have extra abilities and sometimes
extraordinary powers and special purposes. Use Table 7–30: Item
Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma, and Capabilities as indicated if a
ring is intelligent. Rings with charges can never be intelligent.
229
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Potions