CREATING PCS 
ABOVE 1ST LEVEL
Sometimes you’re going to want to create characters that aren’t 1st
level. Perhaps you have purchased an adventure you’re dying to
play, but no one has characters of the appropriate level. Perhaps
you just want to jump right to 5th level and start your campaign
there. Whatever the reason, creating new characters at any given
level isn’t hard (and, in fact, many players find it fun).
If you tell players to create characters of higher than 1st level,
assign an experience point total for them to use. Doing this is
better than just assigning a level because it balances characters
who take multiclass penalties against those who do not. Then the
players should follow these steps.
1.Determine ability scores normally.
2.Determine race and class. If the character is multiclass, deter-
mine how many levels of each class the character has, and in what
order they were gained. (The order is important in step 3.)
3.Determine character statistics. This includes base attack bo-
nus, save bonuses, spells, abilities, feats, hit points (maximum hp
at 1st level and rolled hp for each level afterward). If the characters
are 4th level or higher, allow each to add 1 point to an ability score
at 4th level and every four levels beyond that (see Table 3–2: Expe-
rience and Level-Dependent Benefits, page 22 of the Player ’s Hand-
book). It is important to note if Intelligence gets modified, because
a raised Intelligence score might gain the character more skill
points, but only at that level and beyond. (That is, extra skill points
are not retroactive.)
4.Determine skills. The best way to do this is to buy them one
level at a time. This allows a player to take into account increased
skill points from Intelligence (if any) and changes due to multi-
classing. However, if a character’s skill points per level do not
change (such as when she puts the ability score boost into some
ability other than Intelligence) and no multiclassing is involved,
the player can buy all the character’s skills at once. In either case,
keep in mind that maximum rank in a skill is level + 3 for class
skills and (level + 3) ÷2 for cross-class skills.
5.Equip the character. When creating a 1st-level character, this
means buying normal equipment. At higher levels, it also means
deciding which magic items a character has acquired so far. Refer
to Chapter 7: Magic Items, where all magic items are listed along
with their market prices. Table 5–1: Character Wealth by Level
(page 135) shows the total value of a player character’s gear at a
given level. This value includes mundane items described in
Chapter 7 of the Player ’s Handbook,but the bulk of it, especially at
higher levels, is composed of magic items. See Magic Items as
Gear, below, for advice on how to govern what sort of magic items
a PC can buy with this wealth. Note that these values apply only to
player characters. NPCs use Table 4–23: NPC Gear Value (page
127) to find the total value of their equipment.
6.Work out the details. A paladin needs a warhorse, a druid or
experienced ranger needs animal companions, a wizard might
want a familiar, a character might belong to a guild or have a
cohort, and so on.
Magic Items as Gear
You’re free to limit what magic items characters can choose when
they create characters of higher levels, just as if you were assign-
ing those items to treasure hoards in the game. You can exercise
an item-by-item veto, but an easier method is to use maximum
cost for a single item as a limit. For example, while an 8th-level
character has 27,000 gp to spend, you can limit him to owning no
single item worth more than one-quarter of that, or 5,500 gp. This
is a good way to prevent imbalances such as an 8th-level fighter
with hardly a copper piece to his name who is armed with a nine
lives stealer.
You could also limit characters to a certain type of magic item. For
example, a player creating a 3rd-level character has 2,700 gp to spend,
but you could rule that she can only equip the character with a minor
magic item (one that could be obtained by a roll on the “Minor”
column of one of the random generation tables in Chapter 7).
Character- Created Magic Items: A PC spellcaster created at a
level higher than 1st can use any of the XP and gp you have
awarded to make magic items, provided that she has the proper
item creation feats and prerequisites.
Charged Magic Items: A player may select a partially used
magic item for part of his character’s starting gear. Such an item’s
value is proportional to the charges left compared to the charges
in a newly created item (half price for a wand with 25 charges, 20%
of full price for a wand with 10 charges, and so on).
Limited Use Items:If you’re playing a one-shot random dun-
geon, one-use items cost 5 times their normal price and charged
items have 1/5 as many charges. In a one-shot adventure, in which
it doesn’t matter whether you use up your items, one-use and
charged items are a lot better than they are in a regular campaign. 
In a one-shot dungeon, a one-use item is as good as a 1/day item
because you’ll be able to use each item once. This “5 times” rule
balances the one-use and charged items so they don’t dominate
the random dungeon.
If you’re bringing an existing character into a one-shot dun-
geon, “trade in” your one-use items for other one-use items at 5
times the cost. For items with charges, give them 1/5 as many
charges as normal.
SPECIAL COHORTS
With the DM’s permission, a leader may seek out a special cohort
who is not a member of the standard PC races (the common races).
For creatures with classes, such as a lizardfolk cohort, calculate its
level according to the rules for PCs of that kind of monster (see
Monsters as Races, page 172). For example, a leader with a Leader-
ship score of 8 could have a 5th-level human fighter as a cohort, or
a lizardfolk with two fighter levels, or a bugbear with one fighter
level. For more unusual creatures, add at least +3 to a creature’s
Challenge Rating to determine its effective level. The more special
abilities a creature has, the larger the number you should add. See
the table below for some example special cohorts. Note that evil
special cohorts may have agendas of their own.
CreatureAlignmentLevel Equivalent
Blink dogLawful good6th
LammasuLawful good12th
Werebear (lycanthrope)Lawful good10th
Avoral (guardinal)Neutral good15th
Bralani (eladrin)Chaotic good11th
PegasusChaotic good6th
Unicorn
1
Chaotic good8th
GriffonNeutral10th
Dragonne
2
Neutral10th
SatyrChaotic neutral7th
Hell houndLawful evil7th
Displacer beastLawful evil10th
Imp (devil)Lawful evil7th
Young green dragon
3
Lawful evil16th
Erinyes (devil)Lawful evil16th
Quasit (demon)Chaotic evil8th
EttinChaotic evil15th
1 Leader must be a human, elf, or half-elf maiden.
2 The leader is immune to the dragonne’s roar.
3 The dragon ages but does not gain XP.
The effective character level (ECL) of a creature determines
how powerful it is as a character or a cohort. The Monster Manual
199
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS