Moderate conjuration; CL 12th; Craft Wondrous Item, major
creation; Price 50 gp (anchor), 300 gp (bird), 200 gp (fan), 450 gp
(swan boat), 400 gp (tree), 500 gp (whip).
Quiver of Ehlonna:This appears to be a typical arrow con-
tainer capable of holding about twenty arrows. It has three distinct
portions, each with a nondimensional space allowing it to store far
more than would normally be possible. The first and smallest one
can contain up to sixty objects of the same general size and shape
as an arrow. The second slightly longer compartment holds up to
eighteen objects of the same general size and shape as a javelin.
The third and longest portion of the case contains as many as six
objects of the same general size and shape as a bow (spears, staffs,
or the like). Once the owner has filled it, the quiver can produce
any item she wishes, as if from a regular quiver or scabbard. The
quiver of Ehlonna weighs the same no matter what’s placed
inside it.
Moderate conjuration; CL 9th; Craft Wondrous Item,
Leomund’s secret chest; Price 1,800 gp; Weight 2 lb.
Ring Gates:These always come in pairs—two iron
rings, each about 18 inches in diameter. The rings must
be on the same plane of existence and within 100 miles of
each other to function. Whatever is put through one ring
comes out the other, and up to 100 pounds of material can be
transferred each day. (Objects only partially pushed
through and then retracted do not count.) This
useful device allows for instantaneous transport of
items or messages, and even attacks. A character can
reach through to grab things near the other ring, or
even stab a weapon through if so desired. Alterna-
tively, a character could stick his head through to
look around. A spellcaster could even cast a spell
through a ring gate.A Small character can make a
DC 13 Escape Artist check to slip through. Crea-
tures of Tiny, Diminutive, or Fine size can pass
through easily. Each ring has a “entry side” and an
“exit side,” both marked with appropriate symbols.
Strong conjuration; CL 17th; Craft Wondrous
Item, gate; Price 40,000 gp; Weight 1 lb. each.
Robe of the Archmagi:This normal-appearing
garment can be white (01–45 on d%, good align-
ment), gray (46–75, neither good nor evil align-
ment), or black (76–100, evil alignment). Its
wearer, if an arcane spellcaster, gains the follow-
ing powers.
•+5 armor bonus to AC.
•Spell resistance 18.
•+4 resistance bonus on all saving throws.
•+2  enhancement  bonus  on  caster  level
checks made to overcome spell resistance.
If a white robe is donned by an evil character, she immedi-
ately gains three negative levels. The reverse is true with
respect to a black robe donned by a good character. An evil
or good character who puts on a gray robe, or a neutral character
who dons either a white or black robe, gains two negative levels.
While these negative levels never result in lost levels, they remain
as long as the garment is worn and cannot be overcome in any way
(including restorationspells).
Strong varied; CL 14th; Craft Wondrous Item, antimagic field,
mage armor or shield of faith, creator must be of same alignment as
robe; Price 75,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Robe of Blending:When this robe is put on, the wearer intu-
itively knows that the garment has very special properties. A robe
of blendingenables its wearer to appear to be part of his surround-
ings. This allows him a +10 competence bonus on Hide checks.
The wearer can adopt the appearance of another creature, as with
the disguise selfspell, at will. All creatures acquainted with and
friendly to the wearer see him normally.
Moderate illusion; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item, disguise self;
Price 30,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Robe of Bones:This handy item functions much like a robe of
useful itemsfor the serious necromancer. It appears to be an unre-
markable robe, but a character who dons it notes that it is adorned
with small embroidered figures representing undead creatures.
Only the wearer of the robe can see the embroidery and recognize
them for the creatures they become, and detach them. One figure
can be detached each round. Detaching a figure causes it to be-
come an actual undead creature(see the list below). The skeleton
or zombie is not under the control of the wearer of the robe, but
may be subsequently commanded, rebuked, turned, or destroyed.
A newly created robe of bonesalways has two embroidered figures
of each of the following undead:
•Small goblin skeleton
•Medium human commoner skeleton
•Medium wolf skeleton
•Small goblin zombie
•Medium human commoner zombie
•Medium wolf zombie
Moderate necromancy [evil]; CL 6th; Craft
Wondrous Item, animate dead; Price 2,400 gp;
We ight 1 lb.
Robe of Eyes:This valuable garment appears
to be a normal robe until it is put on. Its wearer is
able to see in all directions at the same moment
due to scores of visible, magical eyelike patterns
that adorn the robe. She also gains 120-foot dark-
vision. The robe of eyessees all forms of invisible or
ethereal things within 120 feet.
The wearer of a robe of eyesgains a +10 compe-
tence bonus on Search checks and Spot checks.
She retains her Dexterity bonus to AC even when
flat-footed, and she can’t be flanked. However, she
is not able to avert her eyes or close her eyes when
confronted by a creature with a gaze attack.
A lightor continual flamespell cast directly on a robe
of eyescauses it to be blinded for 1d3 minutes. A day-
lightspell blinds it for 2d4 minutes.
Moderate divination; CL 11th; Craft Wondrous
Item, true seeing; Price 120,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Robe of Scintillating Colors:The wearer of this
robe can cause the garment to display a shifting pattern
of incredible hues, color after color cascading from the
upper part of the robe to the hem in sparkling rainbows
of dazzling light. The colors daze those near the wearer,
conceal the wearer, and illuminate the surroundings. It
takes 1 full round after the wearer speaks the command
word for the colors to start flowing on the robe.
The colors create the equivalent of a gaze attack with a
30-foot range. Those who look at the wearer are dazed for
1d4+1 rounds (Will DC 16 negates). This is a mind-affecting pat-
tern effect.
Every round of continuous scintillation of the robe gives the
wearer better concealment. The miss chance on attacks against the
wearer starts at 10% and increases by 10% each round until it
reaches 50% (total concealment).
The robe illuminates a 30-foot radius continuously.
The effect can be used no more than a total of 10 rounds per day.
Moderate illusion; CL 11th; Craft Wondrous Item, blur, rainbow
pattern; Price 27,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Robe of Stars:This garment is typically black or dark blue and
embroidered with small white or silver stars. The robe has three
magical powers.
•It  enables  its  wearer  to  travel  physically  to  the  Astral  Plane,
along with all that she is wearing or carrying.
•It gives its wearer a +1 luck bonus on all saving throws.
265
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Robe of eyes