198
Open Lock and Ride; even though both skills are Dexterity-
based, they cover different kinds of activity (fine manipulation of
a mechanism versus keeping a mount under control in combat).
Scarcer yet would be a trainer who could impart knowledge of
Great Cleave and Forge Ring—those feats are so far apart in con-
cept and application that the chance of one character having both
of them is close to nil.
If you allow it, at the expense of a certain degree of realism, a
character can obtain training ahead of time. A player whose char-
acter is at 2nd level, knowing that the character will get a new feat
at 3rd level, might choose to have his character train for the feat
now either because the opportunity is available or to just get it out
of the way.
Distinguishing Skills and Feats:You don’t have to treat skills
and feats the same in this context. For example, you can require
training or exposure for skills but not feats, ruling that feats are
something that develop on their own as a character adventures. Or
you can set such requirements for feats but not skills, justifying
this by the fact that feats are so much more potent than skills and
thus require more investment on the PC’s part to acquire.
LEARNING NEW SPELLS
Divine spellcasters just get new spells when they gain the ability
to cast them. Their deities, or the powers they revere, take care of
it all for them. You will not find a ranger in a library trying to learn
a new spell. 
Arcane spellcasters don’t have things quite so easy. Wizards
must learn new spells and add them to their spellbooks. This
process is detailed in the Player ’s Handbook(see Arcane Magical
Writings, page 178). 
If you require wizards to actually spend game time on spell
research to gain those new spells, assume that it takes one day per
spell (but no roll is needed for spells that come with level advance-
ment) and that such research costs twice what it would normally
cost to have an NPC cast that spell for the character (see NPC
Spellcasting, page 107).
It’s perfectly all right for two PC wizards to share spells.
According to the standard rules, sorcerers and bards don’t need
to study books to get their spells but just automatically gain new
spells when they gain levels. However, as a variant rule you could
require that each sorcerer contact an intelligent supernatural
entity (anything from a lammasu to a demon) to learn new spells.
Such creatures usually don’t want payment in gold but prefer to
strike a bargain instead. These supernatural patrons teach their
mortal friends spells in exchange for an occasional service (which
could lead to an exciting adventure in its own right). Playing the
patron is in the purview of the DM and, depending on the crea-
ture chosen, you should require whatever sort of bargain you see
fit. The following are but a couple of examples.
•A lammasu only makes a bargain with a good-aligned sorcerer.
In exchange for spells, once every other level the sorcerer must
right a wrong or do some specific good deed, such as freeing a
captive  cleric  unjustly  placed  in  prison,  building  a  shelter  for
diseased beggars, or destroying an evil temple.
•A dragon  only  makes  a  bargain  with  a  sorcerer  of  the  same
alignment. In exchange for spells, the dragon requires payment
either in magic treasure or in service. If treasure, the item must
be of a value twice what it would normally cost to have an NPC
cast  that  spell  for  the  character  (see  NPC  Spellcasting,  page
107). If a service, every other level (typically) the sorcerer must
perform some task appointed by the dragon. Usually, this serv-
ice is to procure some specific object and bring it to the dragon,
slay  a  creature  the  dragon  considers  a  threat  or  pest,  or  spy  on
one of the dragon’s enemies and report what he learns.
Bards gain new spells by learning new songs. You can treat this
just as a wizard learning new spells from books in a library, but the
bard is studying with another bard and learning new music. Alter-
natively, you can rule that the bard must spend an equivalent
period of time and money scouring the countryside for new
songs, new rumors, and so on.
Researching Original Spells
If you decide to allow characters to develop original spells,you
can use these guidelines to handle the situation.
A spellcaster of any kind can create a new spell. The research to
do this requires access to a well-stocked library, typically in a large
city or metropolis. Research requires an expenditure of 1,000 gp
per week and takes one week per level of the spell. This money
goes into fees, consultants, material component experimentation,
and other miscellaneous expenditures. At the end of that time, the
character makes a Spellcraft check (DC 10 + spell level). If that roll
succeeds, the character learns the new spell if her research pro-
duced a viable spell. If the roll fails, the character must go through
the research process again if she wants to keep trying.
A viable spell is one that you allow into the game. Don’t tell the
player whether you think the spell is viable when research begins.
(That’s the point of the research.) However, feel free to work with
the player before the research begins and give him guidance on the
parameters under which an original spell might be acceptable in
your game. 
Research to create new spells is always in addition to any other
research involved for gaining spells that are already part of your
campaign (if you decide to also require spell research for the new
spells that casters are entitled to as they attain higher levels). 
The number of spells that sorcerers and bards can know is
strictly limited; members of those classes can never exceed these
limits even through the research of original spells.
GAINING CLASS BENEFITS
You can mandate that to gain any of the newfound class-based ben-
efits earned by advancing a level, a character needs to perform
some overall training. This training requires one week per every
two levels, rounded up. Training requires a character to train with a
character of the same class who is higher in level and costs 1,000 gp
per week. If no such trainer can be found, the cost is the same, but
the time required is doubled. The money goes into fees, consult-
ants, material component experiments, and other miscellaneous
expenditures. Without the training, a character cannot acquire
more hit points, class features, saving throw and attack bonus
increases, spells per day, skill points, new spells, and so on.
GENERAL DOWNTIME
If you dislike the idea of all this formalized training getting in the
way of the heroic, epic campaign you have going, simply require
that whenever a character gains a new level she must spend one day
per level (or just 1d4 days) in downtime. During this period the
character is busy training, focusing, or simply resting and cannot
cast spells, go on adventures, and so on. 
GAINING FIXED HIT POINTS
Instead of rolling for hit points when she gains a level, a player
may (if you use this variant) take the average roll for the class (see
the table below). Constitution modifiers still apply. Below-average
hit points hurt a PC more than above-average hit points help, so
this variant makes characters slightly more powerful.
ClericFighter
SorcererBardDruidPaladin
WizardRogueMonkRanger   Barbarian
Hit Died4d6d8d10d12
Hit points at even23456
level (2nd, 4th, etc.)
Hit points at odd34567
level (3rd, 5th, etc.)
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS