ters that reward boldness speed up the game, while those that
reward caution slow it down.
Always be aware of the sorts of actions you’re rewarding your
players for taking. Reward, in this case, doesn’t just mean expe-
rience points and treasure. More generally, it means anything
that consistently leads to success. An adventure should contain
encounters that reward different types of behavior. Not every-
one prefers the same kind of encounter, and even those with a
favorite enjoy a change of pace. Remember, then, that you can
offer many different kinds of encounters, including all of the
following.
Combat:Combat encounters can be divided into two groups:
attack and defense. Typically, the PCs are on the attack, invading
monsters’ lairs and exploring dungeons. A defense encounter, in
which the PCs must keep an area, an object, or a person safe from
the enemy, can be a nice change of pace.
Negotiation: Although threats can often be involved, a negoti-
ation encounter involves less swordplay and more wordplay. Con-
vincing NPCs to do what the PCs want them to is challenging for
both players and DM—quick thinking and good roleplaying are
the keys here. Don’t be afraid to play an NPC appropriately (stupid
or intelligent, generous or selfish), as long as it fits. But don’t make
an NPC so predictable that the PCs can always tell exactly what he
or she will do in any given circumstance. Consistent, yes; one-
dimensional, no.
Environmental:Weather,  earthquakes,  landslides,  fast-
moving rivers, and fires are just some of the environmental condi-
tions that can challenge even mid- to high-level PCs.
Problem-Solving: Mysteries, puzzles, riddles, or anything that
requires the players to use logic and reason to try to overcome the
challenge counts as a problem-solving encounter.
Judgment Calls:“Do we help the prisoner here in the dun-
geon, even though it might be a trap?” Rather than depending
on logic, these encounters usually involve inclination and gut
instinct.
Investigation:This is a long-term sort of encounter involving
some negotiation and some problem-solving. An investigation
may be called for to solve a mystery or to learn something new.
TREASURE
What adventure would be complete without treasure?
A close second in importance to experience points, treasure
provides an important motivator for PCs to go on adventures. As
with experience points, treasure empowers the PCs. The more
they get, the more powerful they become.
MONSTERS WITH TREASURE
The standard way to acquire treasure is to defeat enemies that pos-
sess it, guard it, or happen to be near it. In the Monster Manual, ev-
ery monster has a treasure rating (indicating how much treasure it
has, although for some creatures the rating is “None”). The tables
found in this section enable you to determine the specifics. After
referencing the level and kind of treasure (coins, goods, items)
found in the creature’s description, roll on the appropriate row and
columns of the proper table.
When generating an encounter dealing with monsters away
from their lair (a patrol, a wandering creature, and so on), remem-
ber that a creature only takes what it can easily carry with it. In the
case of a creature such as a displacer beast, that generally means
nothing. The monster safeguards or hides its treasure as well as it
can, but it leaves it behind when outside the lair.
Example:Gnolls that live in a dungeon often leave their lair to
wage war on nearby orc brigands to steal treasure and food. The
PCs  encounter  and  defeat  the  gnolls  while  the  bestial
humanoids are on their way to raid the orcs. Each gnoll has a
smattering of coins or gems on its person. The leader has the
masterwork greatsword from the group’s hoard and uses it in the
battle. The majority of the gnolls’ treasure, however, remains in
their lair, guarded by a few gnolls left behind and two well-con-
cealed pit traps.
Monsters with Classes
Many monsters advance by adding class levels (see the Monster
Manual). To determine treasure for monsters with class levels, first
give them equipment. Use Table 4–23: NPC Gear Value (page 127)
and use just their class levels to determine the value of their equip-
ment. Then generate their treasure according to their monster
entry and the rules under Building a Treasure, below. This may
generate more items that the monster can use, and that’s fine (see
Custom Treasures, below).
Treasure per Encounter
Table 3–5: Treasure has been created so that if PCs face enough
encounters of their own level to gain a level, they will have also
gained enough treasure to keep them apace with the wealth-by-
level information found in Table 5–1: Character Wealth by Level
(page 135). Just as gaining a level requires between thirteen and
fourteen encounters of a party’s level, so too fourteen average rolls
on the table at the party’s level will get them the treasure they
need to gain the appropriate amount for the next highest level,
assuming that the PCs expend some resources such as potions and
scrolls during those encounters.
Table 3–3: Treasure Values per Encounter
EncounterTreasureEncounterTreasure
Levelper EncounterLevelper Encounter
1300 gp117,500 gp
2600 gp129,800 gp
3900 gp1313,000 gp
41,200 gp1417,000 gp
51,600 gp1522,000 gp
62,000 gp1628,000 gp
72,600 gp1736,000 gp
83,400 gp1847,000 gp
94,500 gp1961,000 gp
105,800 gp2080,000 gp
On average, the PCs should earn one treasure suitable to their
level for each encounter they overcome. The key, of course, is
“average.” Some monsters might have less treasure than average,
some might have more, and some might have none at all. As you
write an adventure, it’s okay to combine the individual treasures
listed for each monster into one larger hoard. If a dungeon is
home to a beholder and numerous bugbears, for example, you can
take  some  or  all  of  the  bugbear  treasure  and  add  it  to  the
beholder’s hoard.
Monitor the progress of treasure into the hands of the PCs. For
instance, you may want to use lots of high-treasure or low-treasure
monsters, yet still hand out a normal amount of treasure overall.
The PCs needn’t have average treasure at every stage in their
careers, but if an imbalance (either high or low) persists for more
than a few levels, you should take gradual action to correct it by
awarding slightly more or slightly less treasure.
Table 3–4: Average Treasure Results
TypeAverage Result
Gem275 gp
Art object1,100 gp
Mundane item350 gp
Minor magic item1,000 gp
Medium magic item10,000 gp
Major magic item40,000 gp
51
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES