his chapter covers the rules you need to play the D
UNGEONS
& DRAGONS
game, from the moment the characters enter
the dungeon to the end of the session, when they tally up
their experience points.
MORE MOVEMENT RULES
The Player ’s Handbookcovers tactical and overland movement for
Small and Medium creatures either traveling across the ground, or
using skills such as Climb, Jump, and Swim. This section of the rules
expands on that information to include creatures smaller than
Small and larger than Medium and also discusses flying movement.
MOVEMENT AND THE GRID
While this is a game of imagination, props and visual aids can
help everyone imagine the same thing, avoid confusion, and
enhance the entire game play experience.
In a round-by-round simulation, particularly when you are
using miniatures, movement will sometimes feel choppy. If a
character runs across a room so large that it takes him 2 rounds to
do so, it might seem as though he runs halfway, stops, and then
runs the rest of the way a little later. Although there’s no way to
avoid representing movement in a start-stop-start-stop fashion,
try to keep in mind—and emphasize to the players—that all
movement during an encounter is actually fluid and continuous.
Movement and Position
Few characters in a fight are likely to stand still for long. Enemies
appear and charge the party; the adventurers reply, advancing to
take on new foes after they down their first opponents. Wizards
circle the fight, looking for the best place to use their magic;
rogues quietly skirt the fracas, seeking a straggler or an
unwary opponent to strike with a sneak attack. With all this
tactical maneuvering going on, some way to represent char-
acter location within a defined scale can really aid the game.
Handle movement and position by using miniature fig-
ures on a grid. Miniatures show where a figure is in rela-
tion to others, and the grid makes it clear how far the char-
acters and monsters can move.
Standard Scale
1-inch square = 5 feet
30mm figure = human-size creature
Scale and Squares
The standard unit for tactical maps is the 5-foot square.
This unit is useful for miniatures and for drawing dun-
geon maps, which are usually created on graph paper.
In a fight, each Small or Medium character occu-
pies a single 5-foot square. Larger creatures take up
more squares, and several smaller creatures fit in a
square. See Table 8–4: Creature Size and Scale, page
149 of the Player ’s Handbook.
Diagonal Movement
When moving diagonally on a grid, the first square
moved  counts  as  5  feet  of  movement,  but  the
second diagonal move counts as 10 feet. This pattern of
5 feet and then 10 feet continues as long as the character
moves diagonally, even if some straight movement
through squares separates the diagonal moves. For
example, a character moves 1 square diagonally
19
Illus. by  A. Swekel