152
Example Ethereal Site: Misty Cemetery
Misty Cemetery (so named because the coastal fog at this location
on the Material Plane often obscures the tombstones) is home to
the ghosts of warlords from long-forgotten crusades. The ghosts
menace wayward travelers and tomb robbers, but they are other-
wise content to spend their time on the Ethereal Plane, biding
their time until they can pass on to their final reward.
The ghosts rarely confront mourners or other cemetery visitors
by daylight—but anyone who visits the cemetery at night, defaces
the crypts and tombs, or enters the Ethereal Plane invites their
wrath. Their ringleaders are Durek of the Scar (Ftr 12), Colonel
Harakh (Ftr 5/Clr 9), and the Eyeless One (Sor 16), but the ceme-
tery is a vast, sprawling place, and the more powerful ghosts can’t
be everywhere.
To draw a map of the Misty Cemetery, scatter small crypts
across the landscape by drawing 10-foot-by-20-foot buildings with
masonry walls and locked (Open Lock DC 30) iron doors. Place a
tombstone in rows of adjacent squares (a tombstone functions as
the slender pillar described on page 64, providing a +2 bonus to
Armor Class and a +1 bonus on Reflex saves). Occasionally pick
two adjacent squares to represent an open grave (which functions
as a trench, described on page 91). When faced with intruders on
the Ethereal Plane, the ghosts will lurk within the crypts, trying to
surprise the PCs by striking through the walls of the crypts.
Ethereal Plane Encounters (EL 9)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–80Roll on relevant Material Plane table*—
81–821 devourer11
831 couatl10
84–861 night hag and 1 nightmare10
8710th-level drow wizard NPC10
88–901d4 xills9
91–931d3 ghosts, 5th-level human fighters9
94–961d6+5 blink dogs8
971d4+2 jann8
98–991d4 phase spiders8
1001 succubus (demon)7
* The encounter is with a creature or creatures on the Material Plane
that the PCs can see; generate an appropriate dungeon or
wilderness encounter.
PLANE OF SHADOW
The Plane of Shadow is a dimly lit dimension that is both coter-
minous to and coexistent with the Material Plane. It overlaps the
Material Plane much as the Ethereal Plane does, so a planar trav-
eler can use the Plane of Shadow to cover great distances quickly.
The Plane of Shadow is also coterminous to other planes. With
the right spell, a character can use the Plane of Shadow to visit
other realities.
The Plane of Shadow is a world of black and white; color itself
has been bleached from the environment. It is otherwise appears
similar to the Material Plane. 
The sky on the Plane of Shadow is a black vault with neither sun
nor stars. Landmarks from the Material Plane are recognizable on
the Plane of Shadow, but they are twisted, warped things—dimin-
ished reflections of what can be found on the Material Plane.
Despite the lack of light sources, various plants, animals, and
humanoids call the Plane of Shadow home.
The Plane of Shadow is magically morphic, and parts continu-
ally flow onto other planes. As a result, creating a precise map of
the plane is next to impossible, despite the presence of landmarks.
If a traveler visits a mountain range during one use of a shadow
walkspell, the mountain range may still be there the next time,
but the individual mountains may have moved about. Precision is
a lost cause on the Plane of Shadow.
The Plane of Shadow has the following traits.
•Magically morphic. Spells such as shadow conjurationand shadow
evocationmodify  the  base  material  of  the  Plane  of  Shadow.  The
utility  and  power  of  these  spells  within  the  Plane  of  Shadow
make them particularly useful for explorers and natives alike.
•Mildly neutral-aligned.
•Enhanced  magic.  Spells  with  the  shadow  descriptor  are  en-
hanced on the Plane of Shadow. Such spells are cast as though
they were prepared with the Maximize Spell feat, though they
don’t require the higher spell slots.
Furthermore, specific spells become more powerful on the Plane
of Shadow. Shadow conjurationand shadow evocationspells are 30%
as powerful as the conjurations and evocations they mimic (as
opposed to 20%). Greater shadow conjurationand greater shadow evo-
cationare 70% as powerful (not 60%), and a shadesspell conjures at
90% of the power of the original (not 80%).
•Impeded  magic.  Spells  that  use  or  generate  light  or  fire  may
fizzle when cast on the Plane of Shadow. A spellcaster attempt-
ing  a  spell  with  the  light  or  fire  descriptor  must  succeed  on  a
Spellcraft  check  (DC  20  +  the  level  of  the  spell).  Spells  that
produce  light  are  less  effective  in  general,  because  all  light
sources have their ranges halved on the Plane of Shadow.
Despite the dark nature of the Plane of Shadow, spells that pro-
duce, use, or manipulate darkness are unaffected by the plane.
Example Shadow Site: Dark City
When the characters enter the Plane of Shadow where it coex-
ists with a Material Plane city, they find themselves in a dark,
largely abandoned version of that town. The parallels are not
exact, so the PCs’ favorite inn may be on a different street, be
built in a different style, or lie in ruins.
Differences between a Material Plane city and its Plane of
Shadow counterpart can be quite significant, such as a huge dark
castle where none exists on the Material Plane, or an ancient
battlefield where the city green should be. Most troubling of all
are the shadowy echoes of people the traveler knows, shadow crea-
tures with the twisted but still recognizable features of loved ones.
These shadow duplicates do not speak and have no special abili-
ties, but the effect is disconcerting nonetheless.
Shadow travelers in a place particularly familiar or meaningful
to them must succeed on a DC 15 Will save to ignore such dark
mirages. Those who fail are haunted and rattled by the similarities,
taking a –2 morale penalty on attack rolls and saving throws as
long as they remain in a location familiar to them. Travelers who
make their saves are unaffected by the dark mirages for the dura-
tion of their trip to the Plane of Shadow.
Not everything in a dark city is a mirage. Undead shadows glide
through the streets looking for anyone who doesn’t belong amid
the gloom, and bodaks that have found their way onto the Plane of
Shadow stalk living travelers.
To draw a map for encounters in a dark city, start by drawing a
normal cityscape (as described in the Urban Adventures section,
page 98). Then reduce roughly one-quarter of the buildings to
rubble (treat as large piles of stone and heavy debris strewn about).
Another one-quarter of the buildings have some structural dam-
age, such as gaping holes in the walls and collapsed roof timbers.
Finally, move a few buildings into locations that don’t correspond
with their Material Plane counterparts, and add and subtract a few
streets and alleys.
Plane of Shadow Encounters (EL 11)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–101 nightwing (nightshade)14
11–201 lich, 11th-level human wizard13
21–401d4+2 spectres11
41–601 dread wraith11
61–801d3 greater shadows10
81–1001d6+3 shadow mastiffs10
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS