264
sor’s Wisdom score in the form of an enhancement bonus of +2,
+4, or +6 (depending on the individual item).
Moderate transmutation; CL 8th; Craft Wondrous Item, owl’s
wisdom; Price 4,000 gp (+2), 16,000 gp (+4), 36,000 gp (+6).
Periapt of Wound Closure:This stone is bright red and dan-
gles on a gold chain. The wearer of this periapt automatically
becomes stable if his hit points drop to between –1 and –9 inclu-
sive. The periapt doubles the wearer’s normal rate of healing or
allows normal healing of wounds that would not do so normally.
Hit point damage that involves bleeding (such as damage caused
by the horned devil’s infernal wound ability; see page 55 of the
Monster Manual), is negated for the wearer of the periapt, but he is
still susceptible to damage from bleeding that causes Constitution
loss, such as that dealt by a wounding weapon.
Moderate conjuration; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item, heal;
Price 15,000 gp.
Phylactery of Faithfulness:This item is a small box contain-
ing religious scripture affixed to a leather cord and tied around the
forehead. There is no mundane way to determine what function
this religious item performs until it is worn. The wearer of a phy-
lactery of faithfulnessis aware of any action or item that could
adversely affect his alignment and his standing with his deity,
including magical effects. He acquires this information prior to
performing such an action or becoming associated with such an
item if he takes a moment to contemplate the act.
Faint divination; CL 1st; Craft Wondrous Item, detect chaos, detect
evil, detect good, detect law; Price 1,000 gp.
Phylactery of Undead Turning:This item is a boon to any
character able to turn undead, allowing him to do so as if his class
level were four levels higher than it actually is.
Moderate necromancy [good]; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item,
10th-level cleric; Price 11,000 gp.
Pipes of Haunting:This magic item appears to be a small set of
pan pipes. When played by a person who succeeds on a DC 15 Per-
form (wind instruments) check, the pipes create an eerie, spell-
binding tune. Those within 30 feet who hear the tune must suc-
ceed on a DC 13 Will save or become frightened for 4 rounds.
Creatures with 6 or more Hit Dice are unaffected. Pipes of haunting
can be sounded twice a day.
Faint necromancy; CL 4th; Craft Wondrous Item, scare; Price
6,000 gp; Weight 3 lb.
Pipes of Pain:These appear to be like any other standard set of
pipes with nothing to reveal their true nature. When played by
someone who succeeds on a DC 15 Perform (wind instruments)
check, the pipes create a wondrous melody. All within 30 feet
must make a DC 14 Will save or be fascinated by the sound. (This
is a mind-affecting sonic compulsion.)
As soon as the piping stops, all those affected are stricken by in-
tense pain at even the slightest noise. Unless a character is in a
totally silent area, she takes 1d4 points of damage per round for
2d4 rounds. During this time, damage from sonic attacks, such as
sound burst, is doubled. Thereafter, the least noise causes an
affected character to become shaken (except when she is in a
totally silent area). This hypersensitivity is a curse and therefore
hard to remove (see the bestow cursespell).
Faint enchantment and evocation; CL 6th; Craft Wondrous
Item, creator must have the bardic music class feature,sound burst;
Price 12,000 gp; Weight 3 lb.
Pipes of the Sewers:These wooden pipes appear ordinary, but
if the possessor learns the proper tune, he can attract 1d3 rat
swarms (see page 239 of the Monster Manual) if rats are within 400
feet. For each 50-foot distance the rats have to travel, there is a 1-
round delay. The piper must continue playing until the rats appear,
and when they do so, the piper must make a DC 10 Perform (wind
instruments) check. Success means that they obey the piper’s tele-
pathic commands so long as he continues to play. Failure indicates
that they turn on the piper. If for any reason the piper ceases play-
ing, the rats leave immediately. If they are called again within a
day, the Perform check DC is 15.
If the rats are under the control of another creature, add the HD
of the controller to the Perform check DC. Once control is as-
sumed, another check is required each round to maintain it if the
other creature is actively seeking to reassert its control.
Faint conjuration; CL 2nd; Craft Wondrous Item, charm
animal, summon nature’s ally I, wild empathy ability; Price 1,150
gp; Weight 3 lb.
Pipes of Sounding:When played by a character who has the
Perform (wind instruments) skill, these pipes create a variety of
sounds. The figment sounds are the equivalent of ghost sound
(caster level 2nd).
Faint illusion; CL 2nd; Craft Wondrous Item, ghost sound; Price
1,800 gp; Weight 3 lb.
Portable Hole:A portable hole is a circle of cloth spun from
the webs of a phase spider interwoven with strands of ether and
beams of starlight. When opened fully, a portable hole is 6 feet in
diameter, but it can be folded up to be as small as a pocket hand-
kerchief. When spread upon any surface, it causes an extradimen-
sional space 10 feet deep to come into being. This hole can be
picked up from inside or out by simply taking hold of the edges of
the cloth and folding it up. Either way, the entrance disappears,
but anything inside the hole remains.
The only air in the hole is that which enters when the hole is
opened. It contains enough air to supply one Medium creature or
two Small creatures for 10 minutes. (See Suffocation, page 304.)
The cloth does not accumulate weight even if its hole is filled
(with gold, for example). Each portable  holeopens on its own par-
ticular nondimensional space. If a bag of holding(see page 248) is
placed within a portable hole, a rift to the Astral Plane is torn in that
place. Both the bag and the cloth are sucked into the void and for-
ever lost. If a portable holeis placed within a bag of holding,it opens
a gate to the Astral Plane. The hole, the bag, and any creatures
within a 10-foot radius are drawn there, the portable holeand bag of
holdingbeing destroyed in the process.
Moderate conjuration; CL 12th; Craft Wondrous Item, plane
shift; Price 20,000 gp.
Quaal’s Feather Token:Each of these items is a small feather
that has a power to suit a special need. The kinds of tokens are
described below. Each token is usable once.
Anchor:A token useful to moor a craft in water so as to render it
immobile for up to one day.
Bird:A token that can be used to deliver a small written message
unerringly to a designated target as would a carrier pigeon. The
token lasts as long as it takes to carry the message.
Fan:A token that forms a huge flapping fan, causing a breeze of
sufficient strength to propel one ship (about 25 mph). This wind is
not cumulative with existing wind speed—if a severe wind is
already blowing, for example, this wind cannot be added to it to
create a windstorm. The token can, however, be used to lessen
existing winds, creating an area of relative calm or lighter winds
(but wave size in a storm is not affected). The fan can be used for
up to 8 hours. It does not function on land.
Swan Boat:A token that forms a swanlike boat capable of
moving on water at a speed of 60 feet. It can carry eight horses and
gear or thirty-two Medium characters or any equivalent combina-
tion. The boat lasts for one day.
Tree:A token that causes a great oak to spring into being (5-foot-
diameter trunk, 60-foot height, 40-foot top diameter). This is an
instantaneous effect.
Whip:A token that forms into a huge leather whip and wields
itself against any opponent desired just like a dancing weapon (see
page 224). The weapon has a +10 base attack bonus, does 1d6+1
points of damage, has a +1 enhancement bonus on attack and
damage rolls, and a makes a free grapple attack (with a +15 attack
bonus) if it hits. The whip lasts no longer than 1 hour.
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS