146
The d20 M
ODERN® Roleplaying Game,a D&D-compatible role-
playing game for present-day adventures, contains a much more
extensive treatment of firearms and other high-tech gear.
Modern Era Firearms:Firearms should be treated like other
ranged projectile weapons. The Exotic Weapon Proficiency
(firearms) feat gives a creature proficiency with all firearms; other-
wise, a –4 penalty is assessed on all attack rolls.
Ammunition:Modern era firearms use bullets essentially similar
to those used in Remaissance firearms. Ten bullets weigh 1 pound,
and a magazine that holds bullets for an automatic weapon weighs
1/2 pound.
The new weapons on Table 5–5: Modern Era Weapons are
detailed below.
Pistol, Automatic: An automatic pistol can fire fifteen times
before reloading and can be used to attack more than once per
round if the user has the ability to make multiple attacks. Releas-
ing an empty magazine and inserting a new one is a move action.
Pistol, Revolver: A revolver can fire six times before it needs
reloading (which requires a full-round action).
Rifle, Hunting: A hunting rifle can fire five times before it needs
reloading (which requires a full-round action).
Rifle, Automatic:An automatic rifle can fire thirty times before it
needs reloading. Releasing an empty magazine and inserting a
new one is a move action. As an attack, an automatic rifle can
instead spray a space 10 feet across with ten bullets. If the attacker
succeeds on an attack roll against AC 10, everyone in that space
must make a DC 15 Reflex save or take the weapon’s damage.
Shotgun:A shotgun is most effective at close range; on any suc-
cessful attack, a –1 penalty is applied to the damage roll for each
range increment of the attack. It can fire six times before it needs
reloading (which requires a full-round action). The weapon uses
shotgun shells, cylindrical cartridges that have a built-in firing cap
at their base. They are packed with a mixture of gunpowder and
small lead pellets.
Grenade Launcher: A grenade launcher can fire fragmentation or
smoke grenades using its range increment, but must be reloaded
each time it fires, requiring a standard action. A grenade launcher
is a tube set on a metal tripod and equipped with a sighting mech-
anism. A single smoke grenade or fragmentation grenade easily
slips into the tube.
Modern Era Explosive Weapons: These explosive grenade-
like weapons work just like Renaissance grenadelike weapons (see
above). for determining how attacks are made and what happens if
the weapon misses its target.
Dynamite: This short, thin cylinder of explosive material has a
fuse that must be lit before it is thrown or set. Lighting a stick of
dynamite is a move action, and the dynamite goes off in the same
round or up to several minutes later (depending on how long the
fuse is). The explosive has a blast radius of 5 feet and deals 2d6
points of bludgeoning damage. Anyone caught within the blast
radius can make a DC 15 Reflex save to take half damage.
It’s possible to bind together several sticks of dynamite so they
ignite and explode at the same time. Each additional stick in-
creases the damage by 1d6 (maximum damage 10d6) and the burst
radius by 5 feet (maximum burst radius 20 feet).
Grenade, Fragmentation:A fragmentation grenade looks like a
large egg, sometimes mounted on a 1-foot-long stick with small
fins. If thrown, it uses its range increment, but if launched from a
grenade launcher, it uses that weapon’s range increment. Frag-
mentation grenades are advanced antipersonnel explosives that
deal slashing damage in a 20-foot radius. Anyone caught within
the blast radius can make a DC 15 Reflex save to take half damage.
Grenade, Smoke: A smoke grenade looks like a squat cylinder,
sometimes mounted on a 1-foot-long stick with small fins. If
thrown, it uses its range increment, but if launched from a
grenade launcher, it uses that weapon’s range increment. One
round after it lands or hits its target, this nondamaging explosive
emits a cloud of smoke (as the fog cloudspell) in a 20-foot radius.  A
moderate wind (11+ mph) disperses the smoke in 4 rounds; a
strong wind (21+ mph) disperses the fog in 1 round.
Futuristic Weapons: Futuristic weapons are like other ranged
projectile weapons, though the type of damage they deal is special.
The Exotic Weapon Proficiency (futuristic) feat gives a creature
proficiency with all futuristic weapons; otherwise, a –4 penalty is
assessed on all attack rolls.
The new weapons on Table 5–6: are detailed below.
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS
Table 5–5: Modern Era Weapons
Exotic Weapons (Firearms)Dmg (S)Dmg (M)CriticalRange IncrementWeightDamage Type
One-Handed Ranged Weapons
Pistol, automatic2d42d6×240 ft.3 lb.Piercing
Revolver2d62d8×230 ft.3 lb.Piercing
Two-Handed Ranged Weapons
Rifle, hunting2d82d10×280 ft.8 lb.Piercing
Rifle, automatic2d62d8×280 ft.8 lb.Piercing
Shotgun2d62d8×230 ft.7 lb.Piercing
Grenade launcher
11
—70 ft.7 lb.—
1 Fires fragmentation grenades or smoke grenades; see the Explosive Weapons table, below.
Explosive Weapons
1
DamageBlast RadiusRange IncrementWeightDamage Type
Dynamite3d6
2
5 ft.
2
10 ft.1 lb.Bludgeoning
Grenade, fragmentation4d620 ft.10 ft.1 lb.Slashing
Grenade, smokeSmoke20 ft.10 ft.2 lb.—
1 Dynamite and grenades require no proficiency to use.
2 See description.
Table 5–6: Futuristic Weapons
Exotic Weapons (Firearms)Dmg (S)Dmg (M)CriticalRange IncrementWeightDamage Type
One-Handed Ranged Weapons
Laser pistol3d43d6×240 ft.2 lb.—
Two-Handed Ranged Weapons
Antimatter rifle6d66d8×2120 ft.10 lb.—
Flamer3d4
1
3d6
1
—20 ft.8 lb.Fire
Laser rifle3d63d8×2100 ft.7 lb.—
1 See description.