You don’t have to literally make shaded text for your own notes,
but be sure to highlight material in your notes that you want to
use to quickly describe the area in an interesting way. Be sure not
to include information that could not be known to the characters,
and do not describe PC actions or emotions (such as “As you cower
in fear . . .”). Be fair about providing the players with clues, such as
the webs in the shaded text for area 1 below, but don’t draw atten-
tion to them. The best way to write shaded text or note what the
characters entering a location would sense is to imagine what you
could see, hear, smell, or feel if you were entering that area, then
set down the pertinent information as succinctly as possible.
THE MONASTERY CELLAR
The abandoned monastery is a burned-out ruin, destroyed when
the place was attacked years ago by gnolls. The interesting part lies
belowground, in the cellars and crypts underneath the ruins. The
characters have traveled to the monastery and, after some search-
ing, discovered a stairway leading down into the darkness. When
they descend, they find themselves in encounter area 1.
1. Entry Chamber (EL 3)
To represent this chamber, use the 4-by-4-square room on the left side of
the dungeon map (the room that ’s adjacent to the 4-by-5-square room).
You can use the cutouts provided at the back of this book to identify the
locations of specific features, such as doors and treasure. To begin, place
one of the staircase cutouts in the 2-square-wide corridor that extends
from this room’s north wall (and ignore the wall between the room and
the corridor). The adventure gets under way when the characters descend
this staircase and find themselves inside the room. In addition to what
the players learned from the shaded text, the room has other features that
will become apparent to the PCs as they investigate the place. One of the
first things they see is a door in the east wall—place a door cutout over
any square along the wall between this room and the one to the east. They
will also quickly notice a pile of rubbish in the center of the room and
another pile of trash in the northwest corner; you can use cutouts repre-
senting rubble to show the location of these features.
A litter of husks, skin, bones, spider castings, and filth lies in a dis-
gusting pile in the middle of the room. A DC 22 Spot check is
required to notice the creatures (a spider and its young; see below)
hiding in the webs above. The refuse pile in the middle of the
room contains treasure.
The Spot DC for the lurking spider is intentionally difficult, but
not out of the reach of the intended PCs (in this case, all 1st-level
characters).
Ten moldy sacks of flour and grain are stacked in the northwest
corner. The cloth tears easily, revealing the ruined contents. One
of the sacks contains a trap.
There is a solid oak door on the east wall. The door is not locked,
but it is stuck (DC 16 to open). Anyone listening at the door who
makes a DC 12 Listen check hears a moaning sound, rising and then
fading. This is merely a strong breeze that blows in area 2. As soon as
the door opens, the breeze rushes out the opening in a gust, extin-
guishing torches and possibly (50% chance) blowing out lanterns as
well. Torches can’t be relit in the area while the door is open.
(The low DC for the Listen check is intentional—you want the
PCs to hear the moaning and get spooked, thinking it’s a ghost or
something similarly horrible. Also, always remember to make a
note of the DC to open a stuck or locked door.)
Creatures:A Small monstrous spider and six Tiny young spi-
ders hide in the upper part of the webs in the center of the room.
If the characters fail to spot the Small spider, it drops down on any
character in the center of the room (a move action). A successful
touch attack roll indicates that the spider lands on a character. The
Tiny spiders remain in the web and eat small meals trapped by the
web. They only move down from the web when all is still to eat a
meal pacified by the larger spider.
If the PCs burn the webs, the six young spiders are killed and
the adult spider (if still in the web) takes 1d6 points of damage.
The webs burn for 8 rounds.
Small Monstrous Spider (1): hp 7.
Tiny Monstrous Spiders (6): hp 2 each.
Treasure:Scattered amid the pile in the middle of the room are
19 sp and a goblin skull with a 50 gp garnet inside. Characters only
notice the gem with a DC 15 Search check.
Trap: One of the sacks in the southwest corner has yellow mold
inside it. If disturbed, it bursts—all within 10 feet must make a
DC 15 Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of Constitution damage.
One minute later, everyone exposed to the initial burst must save
again (same DC) or take 2d6 points of Constitution damage,
whether or not they took damage in the initial exposure.
(It’s not always necessary to write out complete rules, as has
been done here for yellow mold. You can add this level of descrip-
tion to your notes if you need it, or you can simply jot down the
page number and book where it’s found.)
2. Water Room
A good example of what not to include in shaded text is the fact that
the water is icy cold—there’s no way the characters could know this
just by looking at the water from the doorway. Characters who
simply turn around and leave after a glance inside may never dis-
cover the sunken skeleton, much less the helpful items beside it.
This chamber is represented by the 4-by-5-square room adjacent to the area
where the adventure began. The pool occupies the 2-by-2-square area in
the southeast corner of the chamber. 
The only way out of this room, aside from the door the PCs
entered through, is a secret door on the south wall in the south-
west corner of the chamber. Locating it requires a DC 18 Search
check. (Don’t put a cutout on the map to represent this door until the PCs
discover it.)
The monks who once lived here worked this natural cavern in
order to enlarge it. A strong, damp breeze makes it impossible to
keep torches lit here. Eight rotting barrels remain lined up along
the west wall from when the room was used to gather water for the
monastery. A few buckets also lie scattered about.
(In a ruin, it’s always handy to know what a room or area was
formerly used for, even if it now serves a different purpose, or no
purpose at all. Your descriptions can often convey that former pur-
pose, reminding the players that this place has its own history—
it’s not just a backdrop for adventures.)
Lying at the bottom of the pool is the limed-over skeleton of the
abbot. Without a DC 15 Spot check, this appears to be just an
unusual mineral formation. In its bony fingers, the skeleton holds
a tube of the sort designed to contain a rolled-up piece of vellum
or parchment. If the remains are disturbed, the act dislodges the
tube from the skeleton’s grasp. The stream’s current carries away
the tube unless a character dives into the icy water immediately to
get it. This requires a DC 13 Swim check and an attack roll against
the tube’s AC of 14 (modified for size and, in this special case,
A fast-flowing stream 3 to 5 feet deep enters this chamber at
the north end and exits to the south. Toward the south end of
the chamber, some of the water collects in a depression, form-
ing a pool about 4 feet deep at its edge and about 7 feet deep at
the center. You can see a few blind, white crayfish crawling
among the rocks on the bottom.
This damp chamber has an arched, vaulted ceiling 20 feet high
in the center. The walls are made of cut stone blocks, the floor
rough flagstones. Thick webs cover the ceiling.
83
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES