192
Greater Lore (Ex): At 6th level, a loremaster gains the ability to
understand magic items, as with the identifyspell.
True Lore (Ex):At 10th level, once per day a loremaster can use
her knowledge to gain the effect of a legend lorespell or an analyze
dweomerspell.
Loremaster Secrets
Level +
Int 
ModifierSecretEffect
1Instant mastery4 ranks of a skill in which
the character has no ranks
2Secret health+3 hit points
3Secrets of inner strength+2 bonus on Will saves
4The lore of true stamina+2 bonus on Fortitude saves
5Secret knowledge+2 bonus on Reflex saves
of avoidance
6Weapon trick+1 bonus on attack rolls
7Dodge trick+1 dodge bonus to AC
8Applicable knowledgeAny one feat
9Newfound arcana1 bonus 1st-level spell*
10More newfound arcana1 bonus 2nd-level spell*
* As if gained through having a high ability score.
MYSTIC THEURGE
Blurring the line between divine and arcane, mystic theurges
draw power from divine sources and musty tomes alike. While
most spellcasters choose one path to magical power, mystic
theurges walk two roads at once, simultaneously mastering
spells common to clerics and wizards.
Mystic theurges have unparalleled diversity of spells. In
time, a mystic theurge can cast almost any spell in the Player ’s
Handbook. While a mystic theurge doesn’t have the uninter-
rupted spell advancement that a cleric, wizard, or sorcerer has,
he makes up for this with versatility. Mystic theurges are often
obsessed with magical lore, traveling to the ends of the earth to
learn some new arcane secret or divine insight.
Because a mystic theurge casts both arcane and divine spells, all
members of this class are multiclass spellcasters. Cleric/sorcerers
and cleric/wizards are the most common mystic theurges, with
druid/sorcerers more rare and druid/wizards almost unheard of.
Mystic theurges tend to be fascinated with magic in what-
ever form it takes. They’re always on the hunt for powerful
magic items and new arcane spells. Those mystic theurges who
worship a deity use the power of their spellcasting to further their
deity’s agenda.
Hit Die:d4.
Requirements
To qualify to become a mystic theurge, a character must fulfill all
the following criteria.
Skills: Knowledge (arcana) 6 ranks, Knowledge (religion) 6 ranks.
Spells: Able to cast 2nd-level divine spells and 2nd-level arcane
spells.
Class Skills
The mystic theurge’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int),
Knowledge (arcana) (Int), Knowledge (religion) (Int), Profession
(Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), and Spellcraft (Int). See Chapter 4 of
the Player ’s Handbook for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at Each Level:2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are features of the mystic theurge prestige
class.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Mystic theurges gain no
proficiency with any weapon or armor.
Spells per Day:When a new mystic theurge level is gained, the
character gains new spells per day as if he had also gained a level
in any one arcane spellcasting class he belonged to before he
added the prestige class and any one divine spellcasting class he
belonged to previously. He does not, however, gain any other ben-
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS
Amystic theurge
Illus. by M. Cavotta