9
Buildings:Dungeons of at least 10 rooms (8),
temples (any 2 evil deities), poor lodging (5), poor food
(10), average trades (5), poor trades (15), average serv-
ices (5), poor services (20), poor residences (30).
First Impression: The air belowground is dank,
and the darkness is oppressive. It’s eerily quiet most of
the time, but the silence is punctured occasionally by a
scream or the clash of battle.
Social Class:Lower class.
Warehouse District
Adventurers who have business with shipping con-
cerns—or just larcenous intent—may find their way
into this district.
Buildings:Warehouses (30), poor trades (5), poor
services (10), poor residences (55).
First Impression: The massive warehouses that
give this district its name dominate the landscape. The
streets are devoid of life except for the occasional deliv-
ery wagon and the guards who stand watch at some
warehouse doors.
Social Class:Lower class.
Waterfront District
Visitors who arrive by ship often get their first taste of a
city in the waterfront district. Adventurers typically
feel right at home in this rough-and-tumble place.
Buildings:Other (5), temple (Obad-Hai or Oli-
dammara), poor lodging (5), poor food (9), poor trades
(25), poor services (35), poor residences (20).
First Impression: Most of the traffic here con-
sists of sailors in search of liquor or entertainment.
Bars, flophouses, and small shops—many of which
don’t bother to advertise the nature of their business—
line the street.
Social Class:Lower class.
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Certain districts are special simply because their popula-
tion numbers are different (generally lower) than the
norm for their social class. For example, a necropolis may
be an important part of a city, but it just can’t hold more
than 100 living residents. Likewise, an immigrant enclave
rarely houses more than 1% of the city’s total population. 
Remnant Neighborhood
This district is the last vestige of an older culture that has
been largely supplanted by the city’s current residents.
Buildings: Temple  (any  1,  especially  to  an
unusual deity), upscale trade, upscale residences (5),
vacant buildings (3).
First Impression: The architecture here looks
out of place, as do some of the residents. They eye visi-
tors strangely, evidently regarding them as interlopers
on their turf.
Social Class:Middle Class
Immigrant Enclave
This district houses well-heeled representatives of
another culture, such as wizards from a far-off land or
planetouched pioneers from another dimension. 
Buildings: Temple  (any  1,  especially  to  an
unusual deity), magic item dealer, upscale trades (2),
exotic trade, upscale residences (5).
First Impression: This district doesn’t even feel
like it’s part of the same city. The architecture of the
buildings is dramatically different than in other dis-
tricts, and the residents’ garb marks them as a minority
elsewhere in the city. Here, however, they fit right in.
Social Class:Upper class.
Necropolis
This massive graveyard has few or no residents other
than the undead creatures that may lurk among the
tombstones and crypts.
Buildings:Mortuaries (2), mausoleums (16),
temple (Nerull or Wee Jas), shrine.
First Impression: This district is quiet and
orderly. Rows of tombstones and crypts stand silent
guard over the dead.
Social Class:Lower class.
Boat Town
This district is completely afloat. The residents live in
houseboats and do their shopping at other boats. Even
longtime residents of a boat town must relearn their
way around the neighborhood if they leave for a time,
since it constantly rearranges itself.
Buildings: Temple (Fharlanghn), average lodging
(1), poor food (3), poor trades (10), poor services (10),
poor residences (45).
First Impression: Boats of every size and shape
bob on the water, connected by a baffling web of piers,
gangplanks, and rope bridges.
Social Class:Lower class.
Coliseum/Arena District
A massive arena dominates this neighborhood. Its exis-
tence leaves little space for actual residents.
Buildings: Coliseum/arena/hippodrome, associ-
ated buildings (gladiators’ barracks, stables, and the
like) (3), temple (Heironeous, Kord, or Olidammara),