3
District Type:Some districts, such as a water-
front or shop district, represent neighborhoods that
have many similar types of buildings. Others, such as a
lord’s keep or a garrison, may feature single buildings
or complexes that occupy an entire district and house
large numbers of residents and staff. 
Total Pop.:This figure represents the total popula-
tion of the district. The remaining columns (Bbn, Brd,
Clr, and so forth) show how many single-class charac-
ters of each character class (both PC and NPC classes)
dwell in the district. Temple districts have many cler-
ics, obviously, while most aristocrats are found in
upper-class districts.
LOW POPULATION DISTRICTS
The districts with the lowest populations tend to be
upper or middle class. They often feature fine landscap-
ing and ornate buildings.
Civic District
The day-to-day business of governing the city is carried
out from the offices in this district, which is usually
dominated by one massive government building.
Buildings:Council hall, bureaucratic offices,
monument/memorial, guardpost, temple (Heironeous,
Pelor, or St. Cuthbert), upscale lodging (4), upscale
food (6), exotic trades (10), upscale trades (15), average
trades (15), upscale services (15).
First Impression: Robed bureaucrats scurry
from appointment to appointment, and nobles travel
with their retinues. The main building is a stately struc-
ture with plenty of statuary and inscriptions.
Social Class:Upper class.
Civic District, Ruined
This district is like the one above, except that the rulers
of the city have abandoned the massive structure that
once dominated the area.
Buildings:Council hall (vacant), bureaucratic
offices (possibly vacant), monument/memorial, guard-
post, temple (Heironeous, Pelor, or St. Cuthbert), upscale
lodging (4), upscale food (6), exotic trades (10), upscale
trades (15), average trades (15), upscale services (15).
First Impression: The crumbling edifice that
dominates the streetscape once housed the power
center in this city. The surrounding businesses have
also fallen on hard times.
Social Class:Middle class.
Elf Neighborhood
This district, found only in cities dominated by nonelf
races, is where many elves choose to live.
Buildings:Temple (Corellon Larethian), druidic
site, upscale lodging, upscale food (4), exotic trades (3),
upscale trades (15), upscale services (5), upscale resi-
dences (30).
First Impression: The neighborhood has more
than its share of trees, bushes, and flowers. Even the
more modest homes feature flowering windowboxes.
Social Class:Upper class.
Embassy District
Usually found only in a capital city, an embassy district
houses ambassadors, diplomats, and their staffs.
Buildings:Embassies (7), diplomatic residences
(15), upscale lodging (9), upscale food (12), exotic
trades (5), upscale trades (10), upscale residences (10).
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs
BUILD A CITY IN 5 MINUTES 
Many PCs use cities simply as bases of operations
for adventuring. They may visit their home city
briefly between adventures, or occasionally even
during an extended mission. Accordingly, they rarely
see more than a few locations—their favorite inn,
the magic-item dealers on Tentacle Street, and Lord
Rhial’s citadel, for example.
If you’re pressed for time, it’s a good idea to pick a
few districts you like and assume that the rest of the
city is a mix of residential and commercial districts.
Here are the steps for building a city in about 5
minutes.
•  Jot down what makes the city special in a sen-
tence or two. For example, Sumberton is a rainy
city where the trade guilds are at war with the
military commander in charge of the toll roads.
Forghul is a metropolis where rival thanes from
surrounding provinces engage in intrigues, unit-
ing only when giants attack from the north.
•  Decide which places your characters are likely to
visit.  Inns,  magic  shops,  guilds,  libraries,
temples, and government buildings are all logical
choices.
•  Decide which districts feature those important
places and sketch out an intersection or two, plac-
ing buildings according to the guidelines below.
•  Sketch an overall map of the city by drawing the
walls that surround it, placing the important dis-
tricts, and then dividing the rest of the city into a
dozen or so wards. Give each ward a name, such
as “Merchant’s Quarter,” or “Temple Ward.”