ELEMENTAL PLANE OF WATER
The Elemental Plane of Water is a sea without a floor or a surface,
an entirely fluid environment lit by a diffuse glow. It is one of the
more hospitable of the Inner Planes once a traveler gets past the
problem of breathing the local medium.
The eternal oceans of this plane vary between ice cold and boil-
ing hot, between saline and fresh. They are perpetually in motion,
wracked by currents and tides. The plane’s permanent settlements
form around bits of flotsam and jetsam suspended within this end-
less liquid. These settlements drift on the tides of the Elemental
Plane of Water.
The Elemental Plane of Water has the following traits.
•Subjective directional gravity. The gravity here works similar to
that of the Elemental Plane of Air. But sinking or rising on the
Elemental Plane of Water is slower (and less dangerous) than on
the Elemental Plane of Air.
•Water-dominant.
•Enhanced magic. Spells and spell-like abilities that use or create
water  are  both  extended  and  enlarged  (as  if  the  Extend  Spell
and Enlarge Spell metamagic feats had been used on them, but
the spells don’t require higher-level slots). Spells and spell-like
abilities that are already extended or enlarged are unaffected by
this benefit.
•Impeded  magic.  Spells  and  spell-like  abilities  with  the  fire
descriptor (including spells of the Fire domain) are impeded.
Example Water Site: Sargasso Doldrum
A spherical tangle of kelp and seaweed a mile across, the sargasso
doldrum is home to many dangerous predators that feed on the
herbivorous fish that eat the seaweed.
Characters who explore the sargasso doldrum find it tough
going. Even if they have a swim speed, it takes 2 squares of move-
ment to struggle through each square in the web of kelp. Only
those with a freedom of movementor pass without trace spell can move
normally through the area. Line of sight is limited to 30 feet, and
creatures more than 20 feet away have concealment.
The sargasso doldrum is infested with dire sharks, who attack in
great hunting schools without regard to their own safety. More
sinister foes such as aboleths and black dragons study interlopers
as they fight the sharks, deciding how best to hunt them if they
stay among the seaweed.
Elemental Plane of Water Encounters (EL 10)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–201 elder water elemental11
21–451d3 elder tojanidas11
46–651d4+2 adult tojanidas9
66–851 greater water elemental9
86–1001 Huge water elemental7
A ruined war galley sits in the center of the sargasso doldrum.
The ship, protected by a neutral alignment, maximized forbiddance
spell, holds the treasure trove of a powerful water naga wizard. The
aboleths and black dragons don’t know what’s in the ship’s hold;
they would just hire neutral creatures to extract the riches if they
found out what they could gain.
To draw an encounter map for the doldrums, include some ir-
regular clusters of adjacent squares roughly 15 feet across. These
squares, representing particularly dense clots of sargasso, function
as heavy undergrowth (see page 87).
NEGATIVE ENERGY PLANE
The Negative Energy Plane is a barren, empty place, a void with-
out end, and a place of empty, endless night. Worse, it is a needy,
greedy plane, sucking the life out of anything that is vulnerable.
Heat, fire, and life itself are all drawn into the maw of this plane,
which always hungers for more.
To an observer, there’s little to see on the Negative Energy
Plane. It is a dark, empty place, an eternal pit where a traveler can
fall until the plane itself steals away all light and life.
The Negative Energy Plane is the most hostile of the Inner
Planes, and the most uncaring and intolerant of life. Only crea-
tures immune to its life-draining energies can survive there.
The Negative Energy Plane has the following traits.
•Subjective directional gravity.
•Major  negative-dominant.  Some  areas  within  the  plane  have
only the minor negative-dominant trait, and these islands tend
to be inhabited.
•Enhanced magic. Spells and spell-like abilities that use negative
energy are maximized (as if the Maximize Spell metamagic feat
had been used on them, but the spells don’t require higher-level
slots). Spells and spell-like abilities that are already maximized
are  unaffected  by  this  benefit.  Class  abilities  that  use  negative
energy,  such  as  rebuking  and  controlling  undead,  gain  a  +10
bonus on the roll to determine Hit Dice affected.
•Impeded  magic.  Spells  and  spell-like  abilities  that  use  positive
energy,  including  curespells,  are  impeded.  Characters  on  this
plane  take  a  –10  penalty  on  Fortitude  saving  throws  made  to
remove negative levels bestowed by an energy drain attack.
Random Encounters: Because the Negative Energy Plane is
virtually devoid of creatures, random encounters on the plane are
exceedingly rare.
Example Negative Plane Site: Voidstone Field
In some locations on the Negative Energy Plane, the collapsing
intensity of the plane is so great that the negative energy folds in
on itself, stabilizing into solid chunks of utterly black matter.
These chunks of voidstone might be the building blocks of such
items as the sphere of annihilation(page 279). Indeed, anything that
comes into contact with a voidstone is destroyed in seconds.
Unlike with a sphere of annihilation,a character touching a piece
of voidstone gets a DC 25 Fortitude save each round he or she
stays in contact with it. Natives of the Negative Energy Plane are
vulnerable to voidstones.
A chunk of voidstone cannot be controlled through mental
energy as a spheres of annihilation can be.
Voidstones may be of any size, ranging from inches across to
dozens of feet. To draw them on an encounter map, put small dots
(representing very small voidstones roughly 1 foot in diameter) in
about 5% of the squares. Draw 3d6 voidstones that take up a whole
square each, and add 1d4 very large voidstones that are 10 feet or
more in diameter.
The very small and very large voidstones are stationary, but the
square-sized voidstones move. Each round at initiative count 0,
each square-sized voidstone moves 1d3 squares toward the nearest
living creature.
Nightwalkers lurk among the voidstones, which act as an alarm
system for them (the voidstones stay stationary because the night-
walkers are undead). PCs who fight the nightwalkers will also have
to contend with the inexorable approach of the voidstones. The
nightwalkers have learned to use the unusual terrain in other ways;
they’ll use their heft to bull-rush foes into oblivion, for example.
POSITIVE ENERGY PLANE
The Positive Energy Plane is best compared to the heart of a star. It
is a continual furnace of creation, a domain of brilliance beyond
the ability of mortal eyes to comprehend. Its very being wavers
and ripples as new matter and energy is born and swells to full
power like a bursting fruit. It is a vibrant plane, so alive with itself
that travelers themselves are empowered by visiting it.
The Positive Energy Plane has no surface and is akin to the Ele-
mental Plane of Air with its wide-open nature. However, every bit
of this plane glows brightly with innate power. This power is dan-
gerous to mortal forms, which are not made to handle it.
157
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS