296
if both rolls indicate a miss. (Alternatively, make one 25% miss
chance roll rather than two 50% miss chance rolls.)
A creature with blindsight can attack (and otherwise interact
with) creatures regardless of invisibility.
An invisible burning torch still gives off light, as does an invis-
ible object with a light spell (or similar spell) cast upon it.
Ethereal creatures are invisible. Since ethereal creatures are not
materially present, Spot checks, Listen checks, Scent, Blind-Fight,
and blindsight don’t help locate them. Incorporeal creatures are
often invisible. Scent, Blind-Fight, and blindsight don’t help crea-
tures find or attack invisible, incorporeal creatures, but Spot
checks and possibly Listen checks can help.
Invisible creatures cannot use gaze attacks.
Invisibility does not thwart detectspells.
Since some creatures can detect or even see invisible creatures,
it is helpful to be able to hide even when invisible.
LEVEL LOSS
A character who loses a level instantly loses one Hit Die. The char-
acter’s base attack bonus, base saving throw bonuses, and special
class abilities are now reduced to the new, lower level. A 2nd-level
rogue, for example, normally has the evasion ability, but when she
is drained to 1st level, she loses that ability. Likewise, the character
loses any ability score gain, skill ranks, and any feat associated
with the level (if applicable). If the exact ability score or skill ranks
increased from a level now lost is unknown (or the player has for-
gotten), lose 1 point from the highest ability score or ranks from
the highest-ranked skills. If a familiar or companion creature
(such as a paladin’s mount) has abilities tied to a character who has
lost a level, the creature’s abilities are adjusted to fit the character’s
new level.
The victim’s experience point total is immediately set to the
midpoint of the previous level. For example, a character drained
from 2nd to 1st level would drop to 500 experience points.
LOW-LIGHT VISION
Characters with low-light vision have eyes that are so sensitive to
light that they can see twice as far as normal in dim light. Thus, if
a group of adventurers passes down a dark passage with a torch
illuminating a 20-foot radius, an elf with low-light vision can see
everything within 40 feet of the torch. Low-light vision is color
vision. A spellcaster with low-light vision can read a scroll as long
as even the tiniest candle flame is next to her as a source of light.
Characters with low-light vision can see outdoors on a moonlit
night as well as they can during the day.
PARALYSIS
A cleric of Hextor brandishes his unholy symbol at Tordek, ges-
tures with it, and speaks unintelligible words. Suddenly Tordek
feels his body freeze up, and he can’t will his limbs to obey. He
stands rigid and helpless. He hears a fight raging around him and
sees whatever passes in front of his eyes, but he can’t turn to see
how his friends are faring. The sound of his own breath and the
beating of his heart fill his ears. Then he hears someone behind
him, and all he can do is hope it’s a friend.
Some monsters and spells have the supernatural or spell-like
ability to paralyze their victims, immobilizing them through mag-
ical means. (Paralysis from toxins is discussed in the Poison sec-
tion below.)
A paralyzed character cannot move, speak, or take any physical
action. He is rooted to the spot, frozen and helpless. Not even
friends can move his limbs. He may take purely mental actions,
such as casting a spell with no components.
A winged creature flying in the air at the time that it becomes
paralyzed cannot flap its wings and falls. A swimmer can’t swim
and may drown.
POISON
When a character takes damage from an attack with a poisoned
weapon, touches an item smeared with contact poison, consumes
poisoned food or drink, or is otherwise poisoned, he must make a
Fortitude saving throw. If he fails, he takes the poison’s initial
damage (usually ability damage). Even if he succeeds, he typically
faces more damage 1 minute later, which he can also avoid with a
successful Fortitude saving throw.
One dose of poison smeared on a weapon or some other object
affects just a single target. A poisoned weapon or object retains its
venom until the weapon scores a hit or the object is touched (un-
less the poison is wiped off before a target comes in contact with
it). Any poison smeared on an object or exposed to the elements in
any way—if the vial containing it is left unstoppered, for in-
stance—remains potent until it is touched or used.
Although supernatural and spell-like poisons are possible, poi-
sonous effects are almost always extraordinary.
Poisons can be divided into four basic types according to the
method by which their effect is delivered, as follows.
Contact:Merely touching this type of poison necessitates a
saving throw. It can be actively delivered via a weapon or a touch
attack. Even if a creature has sufficient damage reduction to avoid
taking any damage from the attack, the poison can still affect it. A
chest or other object can be smeared with contact poison as part of
a trap.
Ingested:Ingested poisons are virtually impossible to utilize in
a combat situation. A poisoner could administer a potion to an un-
conscious creature or attempt to dupe someone into drinking or
eating something poisoned. Assassins and other characters tend to
use ingested poisons outside of combat.
Inhaled:Inhaled poisons are usually contained in fragile vials
or eggshells. They can be thrown as a ranged attack with a range
increment of 10 feet. When it strikes a hard surface (or is struck
hard), the container releases its poison. One dose spreads to fill the
volume of a 10-foot cube. Each creature within the area must make
a saving throw. (Holding one’s breath is ineffective against inhaled
poisons; they affect the nasal membranes, tear ducts, and other
parts of the body.)
Injury:This poison must be delivered through a wound. If a
creature has sufficient damage reduction to avoid taking any dam-
age from the attack, the poison does not affect it. Traps that cause
damage from weapons, needles, and the like sometimes contain
injury poisons.
The characteristics of poisons are summarized on Table 8–3:
Poisons. Terms on the table are defined below.
Type:The poison’s method of delivery (contact, ingested,
inhaled, or via an injury) and the Fortitude save DC to avoid the
poison’s damage.
Initial Damage:The damage the character takes immediately
upon failing his saving throw against this poison. Ability damage
is temporary unless marked with an asterisk (*), in which case the
loss is a permanent drain. Paralysis lasts for 2d6 minutes.
Secondary Damage:The amount of damage the character takes 1
minute after exposure as a result of the poisoning, if he fails a
second saving throw. Unconsciousness lasts for 1d3 hours. Ability
damage marked with an asterisk is permanent drain instead of
temporary damage.
Price:The cost of one dose (one vial) of the poison. It is not pos-
sible to use or apply poison in any quantity smaller than one dose.
The purchase and possession of poison is always illegal, and even
in big cities it can be obtained only from specialized, less than rep-
utable sources.
Perils of Using Poison
A character has a 5% chance of exposing himself to a poison when-
ever he applies it to a weapon or otherwise readies it for use. Addi-
tionally, a character who rolls a natural 1 on an attack roll with a
CHAPTER 8:
GLOSSARY