160
shoot through them at incredible speed. The layer of Phlegethon
is an exception—there, the normal gravity trait applies.
•Divinely  morphic.  Specific  powerful  beings  such  as  the  deity
Erythnul  can  alter  Pandemonium.  Ordinary  creatures  find
Pandemonium  indistinguishable  from  the  Material  Plane  (it
has the alterable morphic trait for them, in other words). Spells
and physical effort affect Pandemonium normally.
•Mildly chaos-aligned.
Random Encounters: Use the Abyssal Encounters table (page
167) for random encounters in Pandemonium.
Example Pandemonium Site: Howler’s Crag
Howler’s Crag is a jumbled pile of stones, boulders, and worked
stone, as if a giant’s palace had collapsed in on itself, standing in
the center of Cocytus. The Crag’s top is a mostly level platform
about 10 feet in diameter, with a low wall surrounding it. The plat-
form and those on it glow with an ephemeral blue radiance. The
lower reaches of the Crag are riddled with small burrows. Some
are dead ends, but others connect. The wall of every burrow is cov-
ered with writing in lost alphabets that supposedly spells out
strange psalms, liturgies, and strings of numerals or formulas.
Natives of Pandemonium say that anything yelled aloud from
the top of the Crag finds the ears of the intended recipient, no
matter where that recipient is on the Great Wheel. The words of
the message are borne on a shrieking, frigid wind.
Demons of various sorts have learned that visitors constantly
trickle to the Crag. The visitors are usually archaeologists, divin-
ers, or those wishing to send a message to some lost friend or
enemy. Most become the prey of the ambushing fiends.
Howler’s Crag is large enough to provide its own gravity; char-
acters can simply walk up it without needing to climb. To make an
encounter map for Howler’s Crag, draw it as if the Crag were the
floor (covered in dense rubble; see page 90). Include a number of
burrows, which are each 10 feet in diameter. The fiends that
waylay travelers (often hezrous and nalfeshnees) will emerge from
the burrows when they sense the presence of visitors.
As elsewhere on Pandemonium, a fight on Howler’s Crag takes
place among strong winds. Attacks with ranged weapons have a –2
penalty due to the winds, and a Tiny or smaller creature must suc-
ceed on a DC 10 Fortitude save each round or be knocked down.
Sometimes the winds that buffet Howler’s Crag are even more
powerful. For the effects of stronger winds on combat, see page 95.
INFINITE LAYERS OF THE ABYSS
The Abyss is all that is ugly, all that is evil, and all that is chaotic
reflected in infinite variety through layers beyond counting. Its
virtually endless layers spiral downward into ever more atrocious
forms. Conventional wisdom places the number of layers of the
Abyss at 666, though there may be far more. The whole point of
the Abyss, after all, is that it’s far more terrible than conventional
wisdom could ever encompass.
Each layer of the Abyss has its own unique, horrific environ-
ment. No theme unifies the multifarious layers other than their
harsh, inhospitable nature. Lakes of caustic acid, clouds of nox-
ious fumes, caverns of razor-sharp spikes, and landscapes of
magma are all possibilities. So are less immediately deadly ter-
rains such as parched salt deserts, subtly poisonous winds, and
plains of biting insects.
The Abyss is home to demons, creatures devoted to death and
destruction. A demon in the Abyss looks upon visitors as food or a
source of amusement. Some see powerful visitors as potential
recruits (willing or not) in the never-ending war that pits demons
against devils, known as the Blood War. 
The Abyss has the following traits.
•Normal gravity. The top layer of the Abyss (called the Plain of
Infinite Portals) and many other layers have the normal grav-
ity trait,  but  other  layers  of  the  Abyss  can  contain  different
gravity traits.
•Normal time. Time flows at the same rate in the Abyss as on the
Material  Plane.  However,  rumors  persist  of  a  layer  where  time
flows backward with regard to aging. The reverse flow is erratic,
however,  and  a  visitor  could  be  reverse-aged  to  childhood  or
out of existence altogether.
•Divinely morphic. Entities at least as powerful as lesser deities
can  alter  the  Abyss.  Less  powerful  creatures  find  the  Abyss
indistinguishable  from  a  normal  Material  Plane  (the  alterable
morphic  trait)  in  that  the  plane  can  be  changed  by  spells  and
physical effort.
•Mixed elemental and energy traits. This trait varies widely from
layer to layer. In the Abyss as a whole, no one element or type of
energy constantly dominates, though certain layers have a domi-
nant element or energy, or a mixture of two or more.
•Mildly chaos-aligned and mildly evil-aligned.
Random Encounters: Use the Abyssal Encounters table (page
167) for random encounters in the Abyss.
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS
Demon armies battle in the Abyss.