cous. Because of its particular powers, it can be contained only in a
flask whose inside has been coated with 1 ounce of salve of slipperi-
ness(see the previous page), and each time any of the bonding
agent is poured from the flask, a new application of the salve of slip-
perinessmust be put in the flask within 1 round to prevent the
remaining glue from adhering to the side of the container. A flask
of sovereign glue,when found, holds anywhere from 1 to 7 ounces
of the stuff (1d8–1, minimum 1), with the other ounce of the
flask’s capacity taken up by the salve of slipperiness.
One ounce of this adhesive covers 1 square foot
of surface, bonding virtually any two sub-
stances together in a permanent union.
The glue takes 1 round to set. If the
objects are pulled apart (a move action)
before that time has
elapsed, that application
of the glue loses its sticki-
ness and is worthless. If
the glue is allowed to set,
then attempting to separate
the two bonded objects has
no effect, except when universal
solventis applied to the bond.
(Sovereign glueis dissolved by
universal solvent.)
Strong transmutation; CL
20th; Craft Wondrous Item,
make whole; Price 2,400 gp
(per ounce).
Stone  of  Alarm:This
stone cube, when given the command word, affixes
itself to any object. If that object is touched thereafter by
anyone who does not first speak that same command word, the
stone emits a piercing screech for 1 hour that can be heard up to a
quarter-mile away (assuming no intervening barriers).
Faint abjuration; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, alarm; Price
2,700 gp; Weight 2 lb.
Stone of Controlling Earth Elementals:A stone of this
nature is typically an oddly shaped bit of roughly polished rock.
The possessor of such a stone need but utter a few words of sum-
moning, and a Huge earth elemental comes to the summoner. The
summoning words require 1 full round to speak, and in all ways
the stone functions as the summon monster VIIspell. (If sand or
rough, unhewn stone is the summoning medium, the elemental
that comes is Large instead, and the stone functions as the summon
monster VI spell.) The elemental appears in 1d4 rounds. For
detailed information about elementals, see page 95 of the Monster
Manual.Only one elemental can be summoned at a time. A new
elemental requires a new patch of earth or stone, which cannot be
accessed until after the first elemental disappears (is dispelled, dis-
missed, or slain).
Strong conjuration; CL 13th; Craft Wondrous Item,summon mon-
ster VI, summon monster VII; Price 100,000 gp; Weight 5 lb.
Stone of Good Luck (Luckstone):This stone is typically a bit
of rough polished agate or some similar mineral. Its possessor
gains a +1 luck bonus on saving throws, ability checks, and skill
checks.
Faint evocation; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, divine favor; Price
20,000 gp.
Stone Horse:Each item of this nature appears to be a full-
sized, roughly hewn statue of a horse, carved from some type of
hard stone. A command word brings the steed to life, enabling it
to carry a burden and even to attack as if it were a real horse of the
appropriate kind.
A stone horsecan carry 1,000 pounds tirelessly and never needs
to rest or feed. Damage dealt to it can be repaired by first using a
stone to fleshspell, thus causing the stone horseto become a normal
horse that can be healed normally. When fully healed, it automat-
ically reverts to its stone form. While in its stone form, it can be
fed gems, healing 1 point of damage for each 50 gp worth of min-
eral it is given.
There are two sorts of stone horses.
Courser:This item has the statistics of a heavy horse (see page
273 of the Monster Manual), as well as having hardness 10.
Destrier:This item has the statistics of a heavy warhorse (see
page 273 of the Monster Manual), as well as having hardness 10.
Strong transmutation; CL 14th; Craft Wondrous
Item, flesh to stone, animate objects; Price 10,000 gp
(courser) or 14,800 gp (destrier); Weight 6,000 lb.
Stone Salve:This ointment has two uses. If
an ounce of it is applied to the flesh of a petrified
creature, it returns the creature to flesh as the
stone to fleshspell. If an ounce of it is applied to the
flesh of a nonpetrified creature, it protects the crea-
ture as a stoneskin spell.
Strong abjuration and transmutation; CL 13th;
Craft Wondrous Item,flesh to stone, stoneskin;
Price 4,000 gp per ounce.
Strand  of  Prayer  Beads:This  item
appears to be a normal string of prayer beads
until the owner casts a divine spell. Once
that occurs, the owner instantly knows the
powers of the prayer beads and how to
activate them.
Each strand includes two or more special
beads, each with a different magic power.
Special Bead TypeSpecial Bead Ability
Bead of blessingWearer can cast bless.
Bead of healingWearer can cast his choice of cure serious
wounds, remove blindness/deafness,or remove
disease.
Bead of karmaWearer casts his spells at +4 caster level.
Effect lasts 10 minutes.
Bead of smitingWearer can cast chaos hammer, holy smite,
order’s wrath,or unholy blight(Will DC 17
partial).
Bead of summonsSummons a powerful creature of
appropriate alignment from the Outer Planes
(an angel, devil, etc.) to aid the wearer for
one day. (If the wearer uses the bead of
summonsto summon a deity’s emissary
frivolously, the deity takes that character’s
items and places a geasupon him as
punishment in the very least.)
Bead of wind walkingWearer can cast wind walk.
A lesser strand of prayer beadshas a bead of blessingand a bead of heal-
ing.A strand of prayer beadshas a bead of healing,a bead of karma,and
a bead of smiting.A greater strand of prayer beadshas a bead of healing,a
bead of karma,a bead of summons, and a bead of wind walking.
Each special bead can be used once per day, except for the bead
of summons,which works only once and then becomes nonmagi-
cal. The beads of blessing, smiting,and wind walkingfunction as spell
trigger items; the beads of karmaand summonscan be activated by
any character capable of casting divine spells. The owner need not
hold or wear the strand of prayer beadsin any specific location, as
long as he carries it somewhere on his person.
The power of a special bead is lost if it is removed from the
strand. Reduce the price of a strand of prayer beads that is missing
one or more beads by the following amounts: bead of blessing–600
gp, bead of healing–9,000 gp, bead of karma–20,000 gp, bead of smit-
ing–16,800 gp, bead of summons–20,000 gp, bead of wind walking
–46,800 gp.
267
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Scarab of 
protection