Blindsense: Other creatures have blindsense, a lesser ability
that lets the creature notice things it cannot see, but without the
precision of blindsight. The creature with blindsense usually does
not need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice and locate crea-
tures within range of its blindsense ability, provided that it has
line of effect to that creature. Any opponent the creature cannot
see has  total concealment (50% miss chance) against the creature
with blindsense, and the blindsensing creature still has the
normal miss chance when attacking foes that have concealment.
Visibility still affects the movement of a creature with blindsense.
A creature with blindsense is still denied its Dexterity bonus to
Armor Class against attacks from creatures it cannot see.
BREATH WEAPON
While dragon fire is the classic example, a breath weapon may also
be a cloud of poisonous gas, a bolt of lightning, or a stream of acid.
The creature is actually expelling something from its mouth
(rather than conjuring it by means of a spell or some other magical
effect). Most creatures with breath weapons are limited to a
number of uses per day or by a minimum length of time that must
pass between uses. Such creatures are usually smart enough to
save their breath weapon until they really need it.
•Using a breath weapon is typically a standard action.
•No attack roll is necessary. The breath simply fills its stated area.
•Any  character  caught  in  the  area  must  make  the  appropriate
saving throw or suffer the breath weapon’s full effect. In many
cases,  a  character  who  succeeds  on  his  saving  throw  still  takes
half damage or some other reduced effect.
•Breath weapons are supernatural abilities except where noted.
•Creatures are immune to their own breath weapons.
•Creatures unable to breathe can still use breath weapons. (The
term is something of a misnomer.)
CHARM AND COMPULSION
As the strange, wolflike creature loped toward Tordek, he realized
that it was a good friend that meant him no harm. But why was
Mialee casting a fireballat it? He needed to stop her from doing
that again. Later, things got even worse when Lidda didn’t know
that the noble she was chatting up was actually a vampire. After
one look into his eyes, she heard his voice in her mind, giving her
orders that she obeyed without hesitation. She felt like a mere
observer, trapped behind her own eyes, watching as “she” sought
out her companions and invited them to a private party at the
noble’s estate.
Many abilities and spells can cloud the minds of characters and
monsters, leaving them unable to tell friend from foe—or worse
yet, deceiving them into thinking that their former friends are
now their worst enemies. Two general types of enchantments af-
fect characters and creatures: charms and compulsions.
Charming another creature gives the charming character the
ability to befriend and suggest courses of actions to his minion,
but the servitude is not absolute or mindless. Charms of this type
include the various charmspells. Essentially, a charmedcharacter
retains free will but makes choices according to a skewed view of
the world.
•A charmedcreature  doesn’t  gain  any  magical  ability  to  under-
stand his new friend’s language.
•A charmedcharacter  retains  his  original  alignment  and  alle-
giances,  generally  with  the  exception  that  he  now  regards  the
charmingcreature as a dear friend and will give great weight to
his suggestions and directions.
•A charmedcharacter fights his former allies only if they threaten
his new friend, and even then he uses the least lethal means at
his  disposal  as  long  as  these  tactics  show  any  possibility  of
success (just as he would in a fight between two actual friends).
•A charmedcharacter  is  entitled  to  an  opposed  Charisma  check
against his master in order to resist instructions or commands
that  would  make  him  do  something  he  wouldn’t  normally  do
even  for  a  close  friend.  If  he  succeeds,  he  decides  not  to  go
along with that order but remains charmed.
•A charmedcharacter  never  obeys  a  command  that  is  obviously
suicidal or grievously harmful to her.
•If  the  charming  creature  commands  his  minion  to  do  some-
thing that the influenced character would be violently opposed
to, the subject may attempt a new saving throw to break free of
the influence altogether.
•A charmedcharacter who is openly attacked by the creature who
charmedhim or by that creature’s apparent allies is automatically
freed of the spell or effect.
Compulsion is a different matter altogether. A compulsion
overrides  the  subject’s  free  will  in  some  way  or  simply
changes the way the subject’s mind works. A charm makes the
subject a friend of the caster; a compulsion makes the subject
obey the caster.
Regardless of whether a character is charmed or compelled, he
won’t volunteer information or tactics that his master doesn’t ask
for. If a 1st-level wizard happens to have a staff of fire, the vampire
that is compelling him doesn’t know that the wand is there and
can’t tell the wizard to give him the staff or use the staff on his
former friends. The vampire, however, can say, “Hand over your
most powerful magic item.”
COLD IMMUNITY
A creature with cold immunity, such as a frost giant, never takes cold
damage. It has vulnerability to fire, which means it takes half again as
much (+50%) damage as normal from fire, regardless of whether a
saving throw is allowed, or if the save is a success or failure.
DAMAGE REDUCTION
The arrow sticks into the vampire, but she just pulls it out and
laughs as the wound instantly heals. “You’ll need to do better than
that,” she hisses.
Some magic creatures have the supernatural ability to instantly
heal damage from weapons or to ignore blows altogether as
though they were invulnerable.
The numerical part of a creature’s damage reduction is the
amount of hit points the creature ignores from normal attacks.
Thus, a creature with a damage reduction number of 5 struck for 8
points of damage ignores 5 points and takes only 3.
Usually, a certain type of weapon can overcome this reduction.
This information is separated from the damage reduction number
by a  slash.  For  example,  a  werewolf ’s  damage  reduction  is
10/silver, meaning the werewolf ignores the first 10 points of
damage from every normal attack unless the weapon is made with
alchemical silver. Other kinds of damage reduction are overcome
by magic weapons (any weapon with a +1 or higher enhancement
bonus, not counting the enhancement from masterwork quality),
certain types of weapons (such as slashing or bludgeoning), and
weapons imbued with an alignment (such as that granted by the
holy special ability or the align weaponspell). If a dash follows the
slash (as with the damage reduction that is a class feature of the
barbarian), then the damage reduction is effective against any
attack that does not ignore damage reduction.
Ammunition fired from a projectile weapon with an enhance-
ment bonus of +1 or higher is treated as a magic weapon for the
purpose of overcoming damage reduction. For example, a sling
stone hurled from a +1 slingis treated as a magic weapon. Similarly,
ammunition fired from a projectile weapon with an alignment
(such as a +1 holy longbowor a crossbow under the effect of the
align weaponspell) gains the alignment of that projectile weapon
(in addition to any alignment it may already have). For example, a
+1 unholy arrowfired from a +2 anarchic shortbowwould be both
evil-aligned and chaos-aligned (the former from its own unholy
special ability, the latter from the shortbow).
291
CHAPTER 8:
GLOSSARY