SkillRisk
BalanceFalling
ClimbFalling
CraftRuin raw materials
Disable DeviceDevice triggers, or is not disabled
Spot (reading lips)Receive false information
SwimSink below surface of water
Use RopeGrappling hook fails in 1d4 rounds
TAKING 10
Encourage players to use the take 10 rule. When a character is
swimming or climbing a long distance, for example, this rule can
really speed up play. Normally, you make a check each round with
these movement-related skills, but if there’s no pressure, taking 10
allows them to avoid making a lot of rolls just to get from point A
to point B.
ABILITY CHECKS
The game has no rules for trying to stay awake through the
night, writing down every word someone says without a mis-
take, or opening the stuck lid of a container without spilling a
single drop of its contents. However, in the course of an adven-
ture any of these situations could potentially make or break an
encounter. You have to be ready to make up checks for such non-
standard activities.
Using the example situations above, staying awake might be a
Constitution check (DC 12, +4 for every previous night without
sleep), with an elf character gaining a +2 bonus on her check
because an elf is only giving up 4 hours of trance instead of 8
hours of sleep. Writing down every word that someone says would
require a DC 15 Intelligence check, and a DC 10 Dexterity check
prior to the Intelligence check would provide a +2 bonus on the
roll. Opening the container would normally be a Strength check
(DC about 17), and once that’s accomplished, a DC 13 Dexterity
check is required to keep from spilling the contents.
The three kinds of ability checks you could call for to handle a
nonstandard situation include the following.
•A single check using an relevant ability (as in staying awake).
•One ability check that, depending on the result, might provide
a modifier on another check involving a different ability (as in
writing down every word).
•Two or more separate ability checks, usually involving different
abilities,  to  accomplish  a  multipart  task  (such  as  opening  the
jug without spilling).
You can also use a combination of an ability check and a skill
check in an appropriate situation. For example, when swimming
in frigid water, Lidda might have to make a Constitution check to
avoid taking a penalty on her Swim check.
Decisions on how to handle nonstandard situations are left to
your best judgment.
SAVING THROWS
Adjudicating and varying saving throws works a lot like adjudicat-
ing and varying skill and ability checks.
WHICH KIND OF SAVE?
Fortitude, Reflex or Will? When assigning something a saving
throw, use these guidelines.
Fortitude:Fortitude saves reflect physical toughness. They
incorporate stamina, ruggedness, physique, bulk, metabolism,
resistance, immunity, and other similar physical qualities. If it
seems like something that a “tough guy” would be good at, it’s a
Fortitude save.
Reflex:Reflex saves reflect physical (and sometimes mental)
agility. They incorporate quickness, nimbleness, hand-eye coor-
dination, overall coordination, speed, and reaction time. If it
seems like something that an agile person would be good at, it’s
a Reflex save.
Will: Will saves reflect inner strength. They incorporate will-
power, mental stability, the power of the mind, levelheadedness,
determination, self-confidence, self-awareness, the superego, and
resistance to temptation. If it seems like something that a confi-
dent or determined person would be good at, it’s a Will save.
SAVE OR CHECK?
A character slips and falls. He tries to catch himself on a ledge,
while another character reaching forward attempts to catch him.
Are these Reflex saves or Dexterity checks?
The answer to the above question is “Both.” The character at-
tempting to save himself makes a Reflex save. The character trying
to grab him makes a Dexterity check.
33
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
VARIANT: SKILLS WITH DIFFERENT ABILITIES
Sometimes a check involves a character’s training (skill ranks) plus an
innate talent (ability) not usually associated with that training. A skill
check always includes skill ranks plus an ability modifier, but you can
use a different ability modifier from normal if the character is in a situ-
ation where the normal key ability does not apply.
For example:
•A character is underwater and tries to maneuver by pulling himself
along some improvised handholds. Since his body has natural buoy-
ancy (meaning he doesn’t need to pull as hard to lift himself ), the
DM  rules  that  the  player  should  make  a  Climb  check  keyed  to
Dexterity rather than to Strength.
•A character  is  trying  to  pick  the  best  horse  from  several  that  a
merchant is selling. Normally this would be an Appraise check, but
familiarity  with  horses  ought  to  count  for  something.  The  DM  lets
the  player  use  the  character’s  ranks  in  Ride  instead  of  ranks  in
Appraise  and  applies  the  character’s  Wisdom  modifier  (as  normal
for an Appraise check).
•A character  needs  to  use  main  force  to  restrain  a  panicked  horse.
Normally this would call for a Strength check, but a character skilled
at  handling  animals  ought  to  be  able  to  use  his  knowledge  to
restrain the horse more easily. The DM lets the player add the char-
acter’s ranks in Handle Animal (but not his Charisma modifier) to
the Strength check.
•A character has created a masterwork dagger as a gift for a visiting
noble.  He  attempts  to  inscribe  it  with  intricate  designs.  The  DM
rules that this is a Dexterity check to which the character’s ranks in
Craft (weaponsmithing) apply.
•A character is trying to climb a ladder to the bottom of a very deep
chute. Normally, the DM would call for a Constitution check to see
if the character can keep going, but he can also allow the player to
add the character’s ranks in Climb to the roll.
These sorts of unusual situations are always handled on a case-by-case
basis,  and  only  as  exceptions.  The  vast  majority  of  the  time,  use  the
normal key ability.
Remember that when you change the way a skill works in this fash-
ion, you should dictate when the change comes into play—it’s not up
to a player to make this sort of decision. Players may try to rationalize
why they should get to use their best ability score modifier with a skill
that doesn’t normally use that ability, but you shouldn’t allow this sort
of rule change unless you happen to agree with it.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs