154
THE ASTRAL PLANE
The Astral Plane is the space between the planes. When a charac-
ter moves through an interplanar portal or projects her spirit to a
different plane of existence, she travels through the Astral
Plane. Even spells that allow instantaneous movement
across a plane, such as dimension door, briefly
touch the Astral Plane.
The Astral Plane is a great, endless sphere of
clear silvery sky, both above and below. Large
tube-shaped clouds slowly coil into
the distance, some appearing like
thunderheads and others looking
like immobile tornadoes of gray
wind.  Erratic  whirlpools  of
color flicker in midair like
spinning coins. Occasional
bits  of  solid  matter  can  be
found here, but most of the Astral
Plane is an endless, open domain.
Both planar travelers and refugees
from other planes call the Astral Plane
home. The most prominent denizens of the
Astral Plane are the githyanki, an outcast race
that preys on travelers throughout the plane. 
The Astral Plane has the following traits.
•Subjective directional gravity.
•Timeless. Age, hunger, thirst, poison,
and natural healing don’t function in
the  Astral  Plane,  though  they  resume
functioning  when  the  traveler  leaves
the Astral Plane.
•Mildly neutral-aligned.
•Enhanced  magic.  All  spells  and
spell-like  abilities  used  within
the  Astral  Plane  may  be  em-
ployed  as  if  they  were  im-
proved   by   the   Quicken
Spell  feat.  Already  quick-
ened  spells  and  spell-like
abilities  are  unaffected,
as  are  spells  from  magic
items. Spells so quickened
are  still  prepared  and  cast  at  their  unmodified  level.  As
with the Quicken Spell feat, only one quickened spell can
be cast per round.
Example Astral Site: Silver Sky
The characters are surrounded by a silver-gray haze that stretches
endlessly in all directions. The map’s only feature is a colorful 10-foot-
diameter pool that provides a natural portal to another plane (deter-
mined randomly). Some 70% of color pools are one-way portals.
Astral Plane Encounters (EL 11)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–151 astral deva (angel)14
16–251 young adult red dragon13
26–4010th-level human cleric NPC and 12
10th-level goblin rogue NPC
41–501 devourer11
51–651d4 efreet11
66–751 cauchemar (nightmare)11
76–901d3 mind flayers10
91–1001d3 noble djinn (genie)8
If characters explore this part of the Astral Plane, they’ll dis-
cover more color pools that lead elsewhere. It takes 1d4×10 hours
to find a color pool that leads to a particular plane.
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS
Githyanki pirates 
lurk on the 
Astral Plane