Healing a Disease
Use of the Heal skill can help a diseased character. Every time a
diseased character makes a saving throw against disease effects,
the healer makes a check. The diseased character can use the
healer’s result in place of his saving throw if the Heal check result
is higher. The diseased character must be in the healer’s care and
must have spent the previous 8 hours resting.
Characters recover points lost to ability score damage at a rate of
1 per day per ability damaged, and this rule applies even while a dis-
ease is in progress. That means that a character with a minor disease
might be able to withstand it without accumulating any damage.
ENERGY DRAIN AND NEGATIVE LEVELS
An undead wight bashes an adventurer, and she feels cold and
weak, while the wight moves with greater vigor than before. When
the wight strikes her again, she grows weaker, as if her life force
were slipping away. Her friends see her face drain of color and her
flesh shrivel slightly. With the third strike, the adventurer falls to
the ground, a desiccated husk. A fellow adventurer, also struck by
the wight, survives the encounter. Over the next day his spirit ral-
lies, and he throws off the hungry force that clawed at his very soul.
Some horrible creatures, especially undead monsters, possess a
fearsome supernatural ability to drain levels from those they
strike in combat. The creature making an energy drain attack
draws a portion of its victim’s life force from her.
Most energy drain attacks require a successful melee attack
roll—mere physical contact is not enough. Monks, for instance,
can pound such creatures with their fists without risking their
life energy.
Each successful energy drain attack bestows one or more nega-
tive levels on the opponent. A creature takes the following penal-
ties for each negative level it has gained.
–1 on all skill checks and ability checks.
–1 on attack rolls and saving throws.
–5 hit points.
–1 effective level (whenever the creature’s level is used in a die
roll or calculation, reduce it by one for each negative level).
If the victim casts spells, she loses access to one spell as if she
had cast her highest-level, currently available spell. (If she has
more than one spell at her highest level, she chooses which she
loses.) In addition, when she next prepares spells or regains spell
slots, she gets one less spell slot at her highest spell level.
Negative levels remain for 24 hours or until removed with a
spell, such as restoration.After 24 hours, the afflicted creature must
attempt a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 attacker’s HD + attacker’s
Cha modifier). (The DC is provided in the attacker’s description.)
If the saving throw succeeds, the negative level goes away with no
harm to the creature. The afflicted creature makes a separate
saving throw for each negative level it has gained. If the save fails,
the negative level goes away, but the creature’s level is also reduced
by one (see Level Loss, page 296).
A character with negative levels at least equal to her current
level, or drained below 1st level, is instantly slain. Depending on
the creature that killed her, she may rise the next night as a mon-
ster of that kind. If not, she rises as a wight.
A creature gains 5 temporary hit points for each negative level
it bestows (though not if the negative level is caused by a spell or
similar effect).
ETHEREALNESS
Out of nowhere, a spider the size of a horse appears and bites
Mialee. Lidda wheels to stab it, but it’s gone. The adventurers
know the phase spider is somewhere nearby, lurking on the Ethe-
real Plane, watching them and waiting.
Phase spiders and certain other creatures can exist on the Ethe-
real Plane (see page 151). While on the Ethereal Plane, a creature is
called ethereal. Unlike incorporeal creatures, ethereal creatures
are not present on the Material Plane.
Ethereal creatures are invisible, inaudible, insubstantial, and
scentless to creatures on the Material Plane. Even most magical at-
tacks have no effect on them. See invisibilityand true seeingreveal
ethereal creatures.
An ethereal creature can see and hear into the Material Plane in
a 60-foot radius, though material objects still block sight and
sound. (An ethereal creature can’t see through a material wall, for
instance.) An ethereal creature inside an object on the Material
Plane cannot see. Things on the Material Plane, however, look
gray, indistinct, and ghostly. An ethereal creature can’t affect the
Material Plane, not even magically. An ethereal creature, however,
interacts with other ethereal creatures and objects the way mate-
rial creatures interact with material creatures and objects.
Even if a creature on the Material Plane can see an ethereal crea-
ture (for instance, with see invisibility), the ethereal creature is on
another plane. Only force effects (such as magic missile) can affect
the ethereal creatures. If, on the other hand, both creatures are
ethereal, they can affect each other normally.
A force effect originating on the Material Plane extends onto
the Ethereal Plane, so that a wall of forceblocks an ethereal creature,
and a magic missilecan strike one (provided the spellcaster can see
the ethereal target). Gaze effects and abjurations also extend from
the Material Plane to the Ethereal Plane. None of these effects
extend from the Ethereal Plane to the Material Plane.
Ethereal creatures move in any direction (including up or
down) at will. They do not need to walk on the ground, and mate-
rial objects don’t block them (though they can’t see while their
eyes are within solid material).
Ghosts have a power called manifestation that allows them to
appear on the Material Plane as incorporeal creatures. Still, they
are on the Ethereal Plane, and another ethereal creature can inter-
act normally with a manifesting ghost.
Ethereal creatures pass through and operate in water as easily
as air.
Ethereal creatures do not fall or take falling damage.
EVASION AND IMPROVED EVASION
These extraordinary abilities allow the target of an area attack to
leap or twist out of the way. Rogues and monks have evasion and
improved evasion as class features, but certain other creatures
have these abilities, too.
If subjected to an attack that allows a Reflex save for half dam-
age, a character with evasion takes no damage on a successful save.
As with a Reflex save for any creature, a character must have
room to move in order to evade. A bound character or one squeez-
ing through an area (crawling through a 2-1/2-foot-wide shaft, for
example) cannot use evasion.
As with a Reflex save for any creature, evasion is a reflexive abil-
ity. The character need not know that the attack is coming to use
evasion.
Rogues and monks cannot use evasion in medium or heavy
armor. Some creatures with the evasion ability as an innate quality
do not have this limitation.
Improved evasion is like evasion, except that even on a failed
saving throw the character takes only half damage.
FAST HEALING
A creature with fast healing has the extraordinary ability to regain
hit points at an exceptional rate. Except for what is noted here, fast
healing is like natural healing (see page 146 of the Player ’s Hand-
book).
At the beginning of each of the creature’s turns, it heals a certain
number of hit points (defined in its description).
Unlike regeneration (page 298), fast healing does not allow a
creature to regrow or reattach lost body parts.
293
CHAPTER 8:
GLOSSARY