294
A creature that has taken both nonlethal and lethal damage
heals the nonlethal damage first.
Fast healing does not restore hit points lost from starvation,
thirst, or suffocation.
Fast  healing  does  not  increase  the  number  of  hit  points
regained when a creature polymorphs.
FEAR
A young adult green dragon charges the adventurers. Tordek feels
a twinge of fear but grits his teeth and ignores it. Lidda doesn’t
stand up as well to the charge. She holds her ground, but fear takes
the edge off her skill. The cohort who had recently joined them,
however, drops her sword and flees recklessly, her screams fading
in the distance.
Spells, magic items, and certain monsters can affect characters
with fear. In most cases, the character makes a Will saving throw
to resist this effect, and a failed roll means that the character is
shaken, frightened, or panicked.
Shaken:Characters who are shaken take a –2 penalty on attack
rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks.
Frightened:Characters who are frightened are shaken, and in
addition they flee from the source of their fear as quickly as they
can. They can choose the path of their flight. Other than that stip-
ulation, once they are out of sight (or hearing) of the source of
their fear, they can act as they want. However, if the duration of
their fear continues, characters can be forced to flee once more if
the source of their fear presents itself again. Characters unable to
flee can fight (though they are still shaken).
Panicked:Characters who are panicked are shaken, and they
run away from the source of their fear as quickly as they can.
Other than running away from the source, their path is random.
They flee from all other dangers that confront them rather than
facing those dangers. Panicked characters cower if they are pre-
vented from fleeing.
Becoming Even More Fearful:Fear effects are cumulative. A
shaken character who is made shaken again becomes frightened,
and a shaken character who is made frightened becomes panicked
instead. A frightened character who is made shaken or frightened
becomes panicked instead.
FIRE IMMUNITY
A creature with fire immunity, such as a fire giant, never takes fire
damage. It has vulnerability to cold, which means it takes half
again as much (+50%) damage as normal from cold, regardless of
whether a saving throw is allowed, or if the save is a success or
failure.
GASEOUS FORM
Some creatures have the supernatural or spell-like ability to take
the form of a cloud of vapor or gas.
Creatures in gaseous form can’t run but can fly. A gaseous crea-
ture can move about and do the things that a cloud of gas can con-
ceivably do, such as flow through the crack under a door. It can’t,
however, pass through solid matter.
Gaseous creatures can’t attack physically or cast spells with
verbal, somatic, material, or focus components. They lose their
supernatural abilities (except for the supernatural ability to
assume gaseous form, of course).
Creatures in gaseous form have damage reduction 10/magic.
Spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities affect them
normally. Creatures in gaseous form lose all benefit of material
armor (including natural armor), though size, Dexterity, deflec-
tion bonuses, and armor bonuses from force armor (for example,
from the mage armorspell) still apply.
Gaseous creatures do not need to breathe and are immune to
attacks involving breathing (troglodyte stench, poison gas, and
the like).
Gaseous creatures can’t enter water or other liquid. They are not
ethereal or incorporeal. They are affected by winds or other forms
of moving air to the extent that the wind pushes them in the direc-
tion the wind is moving. However, even the strongest wind can’t
disperse or damage a creature in gaseous form.
Discerning a creature in gaseous form from natural mist requires
a DC 15 Spot check. Creatures in gaseous form attempting to hide
in an area with mist, smoke, or other gas gain a +20 bonus.
GAZE ATTACKS
The medusa looks around, throwing dangerous glances every-
where, and focusing its eyes on specific victims. Lidda closes her
eyes and tries to aim her arrows by ear. Jozan averts his eyes but
tries to watch the creature with peripheral vision so he knows
where to project his searing lightspell. Tordek trusts fate and looks
the thing in the eye as he swings his mighty axe. Magic washes
through him, and he shrugs it off. Jozan, however, accidentally
catches the thing’s eye, and he’s not strong enough to resist. His
body hardens and turns to stone.
While the medusa’s gaze is well known, gaze attacks can also
charm, curse, or even kill. Gaze attacks not produced by a spell are
supernatural.
Each character within range of a gaze attack must attempt a
saving throw (which can be a Fortitude or Will save) each round at
the beginning of his turn.
An opponent can avert his eyes from the creature’s face, looking
at the creature’s body, watching its shadow, or tracking the crea-
ture in a reflective surface. Each round, the opponent has a 50%
chance of not having to make a saving throw. The creature with
the gaze attack gains concealment relative to the opponent.
An opponent can shut his eyes, turn his back on the creature, or
wear a blindfold. In these cases, the opponent does not need to
make a saving throw. The creature with the gaze attack gains total
concealment relative to the opponent.
A creature with a gaze attack can actively attempt to use its gaze
as an attack action. The creature simply chooses a target within
range, and that opponent must attempt a saving throw. If the
target has chosen to defend against the gaze as discussed above,
the opponent gets a chance to avoid the saving throw (either 50%
chance for averting eyes or 100% chance for shutting eyes). It is
possible for an opponent to save against a creature’s gaze twice
during the same round, once before its own action and once
during the creature’s action.
Looking at the creature’s image (such as in a mirror or as part of
an illusion) does not subject the viewer to a gaze attack.
A creature is immune to its own gaze attack.
If visibility is limited (by dim lighting, a fog, or the like) so that
it results in concealment, there is a percentage chance equal to the
normal miss chance for that degree of concealment that a charac-
ter won’t need to make a saving throw in a given round. This
chance is not cumulative with the chance for averting your eyes,
but is rolled separately.
Invisible creatures cannot use gaze attacks.
Characters using darkvision in complete darkness are affected
by a gaze attack normally.
Unless specified otherwise, a creature with a gaze attack can
control its gaze attack and “turn it off ” when so desired.
INCORPOREALITY
Lidda spots a translucent face poking forth from a wall, but it’s
gone by the time she alerts her companions. The party starts to
back out of the ruined throne room they’re exploring, when
suddenly several ghostly figures fly out of the walls toward
them. Tordek raises his magic shield to fend off a spectre’s
attack, but the incorporeal hand passes through the shield and
through his magic plate armor. It touches his heart, which sud-
denly grows cold.
CHAPTER 8:
GLOSSARY