dupe others. All shadowdancer troupes maintain an aura of mys-
tery among the common folk, who never know whether to think
well or ill of them.
Hit Die:d8.
Requirements
To qualify to become a shadowdancer, a character must fulfill all
the following criteria.
Skills: Move Silently 8 ranks, Hide 10 ranks, Perform (dance)
5 ranks.
Feats: Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility.
Class Skills
The shadowdancer’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Decipher Script (Int), Diplomacy
(Cha), Disguise (Cha), Es-
cape  Artist  (Dex),  Hide
(Dex),  Jump  (Str),  Listen
(Wis), Move Silently (Dex),
Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis),
Search (Int), Sleight of Hand (Dex),
Spot (Wis), Tumble (Dex), and Use
Rope (Dex). See Chapter 4 of the Player ’s
Handbookfor skill descriptions.
Skill Points at Each Level:6 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are features of the shadowdancer pres-
tige class.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Shadowdancers
are proficient with the club, crossbow (hand, light,
or heavy), dagger (any type), dart, mace, morn-
ingstar, quarterstaff, rapier, sap, shortbow
(normal and composite), and short sword.
Shadowdancers are proficient with light
armor but not with shields.
Hide in Plain Sight (Su): A shadow-
dancer can use the Hide skill even while
being observed. As long as she is within 10
feet of some sort of shadow, a shadowdancer
can hide herself from view in the open
without   anything   to   actually   hide
behind. She cannot, however, hide in her
own shadow.
Evasion (Ex): At 2nd level, a shadowdancer gains evasion. If
exposed to any effect that normally allows her to attempt a Reflex
saving throw for half damage (such as a fireball), she takes no
damage with a successful saving throw. The evasion ability can only
be used if the shadowdancer is wearing light armor or no armor.
Darkvision (Su): At 2nd level, a shadowdancer can see in the
dark as though she were permanently under the effect of a dark-
visionspell.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Starting at 2nd level, a shadowdancer has
the ability to react to danger before her senses would normally allow
her to even be aware of it. She retains her Dexterity bonus to AC (if
any) regardless of being caught flat-footed or struck by an invisible
attacker. (She still loses any Dexterity bonus to AC if immobilized.)
If a character gains uncanny dodge from a second class (such as
barbarian or rogue), the character automatically gains improved
uncanny dodge (see below).
Shadow Illusion(Sp): When a shadowdancer reaches 3rd level, she
can create visual illusions from surrounding shadows. This ability’s
effect is identical to that of the arcane spell silent imageand may be
employed once per day.
Summon Shadow (Su): At 3rd level, a shadowdancer can sum-
mon a shadow, an undead shade (see the Monster
Manualfor the shadow’s statistics). Unlike a
normal shadow, this shadow’s align-
ment matches that of the shadow-
dancer, and the creature cannot
create spawn. The summoned
shadow  cannot  be  turned,
rebuked, or commanded by
any third party. This shadow
serves as a companion to the
shadowdancer and can com-
municate intelligibly with the
shadowdancer. Every third level
gained by the shadowdancer adds +2
HD (and the requisite base attack and
base  save  bonus  increases)  to  her
shadow companion. For example, a 9th-
level shadowdancer can have a shadow com-
panion with 6 HD.
If a shadow companion is destroyed, or the
shadowdancer chooses to dismiss it, the shadow-
dancer must attempt a DC 15 Fortitude save. If
the saving throw fails, the shadowdancer loses 200
experience points per shadowdancer level. A suc-
cessful saving throw reduces the loss by half, to 100
XP per prestige class level. The shadowdancer’s XP
total can never go below 0 as the result of a shadow’s dis-
missal or destruction. A destroyed or dismissed shadow
companion cannot be replaced for 30 days.
Shadow Jump (Su): At 4th level, a shadowdancer
gains the ability to travel between shadows as if by
means of a dimension doorspell. The limitation is that the
magical transport must begin and end in an area with at least some
shadow. A shadowdancer can jump up to a total of 20 feet each day
in this way; this may be a single jump of 20 feet or two jumps of 10
feet each. Every two levels higher than 4th, the distance a shadow-
dancer can jump each day doubles (40 feet at 6th, 80 feet at 8th, and
160 feet at 10th). This amount can be split among many jumps, but
each one, no matter how small, counts as a 10-foot increment. (A
6th-level shadowdancer who jumps 32 feet cannot jump again
until the next day.)
Defensive Roll (Ex):Starting at 5th level, a shadowdancer can
roll with a potentially lethal blow to take less damage from it.
Once per day, when a shadowdancer would be reduced to 0 hit
points or less by damage in combat (from a weapon or other blow,
not a spell or special ability), she can attempt to roll with the
damage. She makes a Reflex saving throw (DC = damage dealt)
and, if successful, takes only half damage from the blow. She must
be aware of the attack and able to react to it in order to execute her
195
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS
Illus. by  J. Foster
Table 6–16: The Shadowdancer
Base
Attack          FortRefWill
LevelBonusSaveSaveSaveSpecial
1st+0+0+2+0Hide in plain sight 
2nd+1+0+3+0Evasion, darkvision,
uncanny dodge
3rd+2+1+3+1Shadow illusion, summon
shadow
4th+3+1+4+1Shadow jump 20 ft.
5th+3+1+4+1Defensive roll, improved
uncanny dodge
6th+4+2+5+2Shadow jump 40 ft.,
summon shadow
7th+5+2+5+2Slippery mind
8th+6+2+6+2Shadow jump 80 ft.
9th+6+3+6+3Summon shadow
10th+7+3+7+3Shadow jump 160 ft.,
improved evasion
A shadowdancer