24
controls this part of the dungeon. Suddenly, in the middle of the
fight, a strike team of dwarves wanders into the room where the
battle rages. If, in the course of a battle between two sides, some
third group enters the battle, they should come into the action in
between rounds. The following rules apply to this situation,
whether or not the new group is allied with one or more existing
side involved in the encounter.
Newcomers Are Aware:If any (or all) of the newcomers are
aware of one or both of the sides in a battle, they take their actions
before anyone else. In effect, they go first in the initiative se-
quence. Their initiative check result is considered to be 1 higher
than the highest initiative check result among the other partici-
pants in the encounter. If differentiation is needed for the actions
of the newcomers, they act in order of their Dexterity scores, high-
est to lowest. The reason for this rule is twofold.
•Since they’re aware, but there’s no way to get an action ahead of
everyone else (because the encounter has already started), they
go  first  to  simulate  their  advantage.  This  happens  whether  the
other sides are aware of the new side or not.
•Placing  the  newcomers  at  the  beginning  of  the  round  means
that those who had the highest initiative check results prior to
their  arrival  are  the  first  characters  to  have  an  opportunity  to
react  to  them.  This  is  an  important  advantage  for  characters
with high places in the initiative order.
Newcomers Not Aware: If any or all of the newcomers are not
aware of the other sides when they enter the encounter (for
example, the PCs stumble unaware into a fight between two mon-
sters in a dungeon), the newcomers still come into play at the
beginning of the round, but they roll initiative normally. If one of
the other characters involved in the encounter has a higher initia-
tive check result than one or more of the newcomers, that charac-
ter can react to those newcomers before they get a chance to act
(the newcomers are caught flat-footed).
If more than one new group enters an existing encounter at the
same  time,  you  must  first  decide  if  they  are  aware  of  the
encounter. Those that are unaware, “stumbling in,” roll initiative.
Those that are aware act first in the round, in the order of their
Dexterity scores, even if they are not in the same group.
Example: A group of powerful adventurers fights a naga in a
dungeon room. The naga rolled badly for initiative, and all the ad-
venturers act before it. Between rounds three and four of that bat-
tle, three orcs on a random patrol stumble in. At the same time,
two more nagas arrive, having been alerted by the sounds of the
battle. At the beginning of round four, the two new nagas act in
the order of their Dexterity scores. Then the orcs roll for initiative,
and the results of their rolls are placed within the normal initiative
order for the battle. In this case, poor check results place them
dead last, even after the original naga.
Then the adventurers act, able to react either to the flat-footed
orcs or to the new naga reinforcements. Then the original naga
acts, followed by the orcs (who probably flee from this battle,
which is clearly out of their league). This same sequence is used
for subsequent rounds of the battle.
KEEPING THINGS MOVING
Initiative dictates the flow of who goes when. It is the tool that the
game uses to keep things moving, but ultimately it’s you who
needs to make sure that happens. Encourage the players to be
ready with their actions when each one’s turn comes up. Players
have less fun if they spend a lot of time sitting at the table waiting
for someone else to decide what to do.
Some resourceful players will learn tricks to help you move
things along. When attacking, they roll attack and damage dice at
once, so that if successful, they can tell you the damage that they
deal immediately. If they know that their next action will require
a die roll, they’ll roll it ahead of time, so that when you ask them
what they’re going to do, they can tell you immediately. (“I attack
with my battleaxe and hit AC 14. If that’s good enough, I deal 9
points of damage.”) Some DMs like to have players make each roll
separately, so you’ll have to decide for yourself whether you allow
prerolling.
One useful thing you can do is to write down the initiative se-
quence once it’s determined for a given encounter. If you place
this information where all the players can see it, each will know
when his character’s turn is coming and hopefully will be ready to
tell you his action when it comes time for him to act. Don’t write
down the NPCs’ places in the initiative sequence, at least not until
they have acted once—the players shouldn’t know who’s going to
act before the enemies and who will act after. It’s too easy to plan
actions around when their opponents act.
Simultaneous Activity
When you play out a combat scene or some other activity for
which time is measured in rounds, it can be important to remem-
ber that all the PCs’ and NPCs’ actions are occurring simultane-
ously. For instance, in one 6-second round, Mialee might be trying
to cast a spell at the same time that Lidda is moving in to make a
sneak attack.
However, when everyone at the table plays out a combat round,
each individual acts in turn according to the initiative count for
his character. Obviously, this is necessary, because if every indi-
vidual took his turn at the same time, mass confusion would
result. However, this sequential order of play can occasionally lead
to situations when something significant happens to a character at
the end of his turn but before other characters have acted in the
same round.
For instance, suppose Tordek hustles 15 feet ahead of his
friends down a corridor, turns a corner, and hustles another 10
feet down a branching corridor, only to trigger a trap at the end of
his turn. In order to maintain the appearance of simultaneous
activity, you’re within your rights to rule that Tordek doesn’t trig-
ger the trap until the end of the round. After all, it takes him some
time to get down the corridor, and in an actual real-time situation
the other characters who have yet to act in the round would be
taking their actions during this same time.
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
VARIANT: STRIKING THE COVER 
INSTEAD OF A MISSED TARGET
In ranged combat against a target that has cover, it may be impor-
tant to know whether the cover was actually struck by an incoming
attack that misses the intended target. First, determine if the attack
roll  would  have  hit  the  protected  target  without  the  cover.  If  the
attack  roll  falls  within  a  range  low  enough  to  miss  the  target  with
cover  but  high  enough  to  strike  the  target  if  there  had  been  no
cover, the object used for cover was struck. If a creature is provid-
ing cover for another character and the attack roll exceeds the AC of
the  covering  creature,  the  covering  creature  takes  the  damage
intended for the target.
If  the  covering  creature  has  a  Dexterity  bonus  to  AC  or  a  dodge
bonus, and this bonus keeps the covering creature from being hit, then
the original target is hit instead. The covering creature has dodged out
of  the  way  and  didn’t  provide  cover  after  all.  A  covering  creature  can
choose not to apply his Dexterity bonus to AC and/or his dodge bonus,
if his intent is to try to take the damage in order to keep the covered
character from being hit.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs