Difficult Choices: When a choice has a significant consequence, it
should sometimes be a difficult one to make. Should the PCs help
the church of Heironeous wage war on the goblins, even though
the conflict will almost certainly keep them from reaching the
Fortress of Nast before the evil duke summons the slaadi assassins?
Should the PCs trust the words of a dragon, or ignore her warning?
Different Sorts of Encounters:A good adventure should pro-
vide a number of different experiences—attack, defense, prob-
lem-solving, roleplaying, and investigation. Make sure you vary
the kinds of encounters the adventure provides (see Encounters,
page 48).
Exciting Events: Like a well-told story, a good adventure
should have rising and falling tension. This sort of pacing is easier
to accomplish with an event-based adventure (since you have
more control over when each encounter takes place), but it’s pos-
sible in a site-based adventure to design a locale where the
encounters are likely to occur in a desired fashion. Make sure to
pace events appropriately. Start slowly and have the action build. A
climactic encounter always makes for a good ending.
Encounters that Make Use of PC Abilities: If the party’s
wizard or sorcerer can cast fly, think about incorporating aerial
encounters into the adventure. When there’s a cleric along, occa-
sionally include undead that she can use her turning ability on. If
the party has a ranger or a druid, include encounters with animals
(dire animals can make challenging encounters for even mid- to
high-level PCs; see the Monster Manualfor more information). The
advice to remember is “Everyone gets a chance to shine.” All abili-
ties available to PCs were designed to make the characters better,
but an ability (or a spell) that a character never gets to use is a waste.
BAD STRUCTURE
Try to avoid the pitfalls described below.
Leading the PCs by the Nose:A bad event-based adventure is
marked by mandates restricting PC actions or is based on events
that occur no matter what the PCs do. For example, a plot that
hinges on the PCs finding a mysterious heirloom, only to have it
stolen by NPCs, is dangerous—if the players invent a good way to
protect the heirloom, they won’t like having it stolen anyway just
because that’s what you had planned beforehand. The players end
up feeling powerless and frustrated. No matter what, all adven-
tures should depend upon player choices, and players should feel
as though what they choose to do matters. The results should
affect the campaign setting (albeit perhaps in minor ways), and
they should have consequences (good or bad) for the PCs.
45
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES
56   The funeral for a good fighter is disrupted by enemies he made
while alive.
57   Colossal vermin are straying out of the desert to attack
settlements.
58   An evil tyrant outlaws nonofficially sanctioned magic use.
59   A huge dire wolf, apparently immune to magic, is organizing
the wolves in the wood.
60   A community of gnomes builds a flying ship.
61   An island at the center of the lake is actually the top of a
strange, submerged fortress.
62   Buried below the Tree of the World lies the Master Clock of
Time.
63   A child wanders into a vast necropolis, and dusk approaches
quickly.
64   All the dwarves in an underground city have disappeared.
65   A strange green smoke billows out of a cave near a mysterious
ruin.
66   Mysterious groaning sounds come from a haunted wood at
night.
67   Thieves steal a great treasure and flee into Mordenkainen’s
magnificent mansion.
68   A sorcerer attempts to travel ethereally but disappears
completely in the process.
69   A paladin’s quest for atonement leads her to a troll lair too well
defended for her to tackle alone.
70   A kingdom known for its wizards prepares for war.
71   The high priest is an illusion.
72   A new noble seeks to clear a patch of wilderness of all
monsters.
73   A bulette is tearing apart viable farmland.
74   An infestation of stirges drives yuan-ti closer to civilized lands.
75   Treants in the woods are threatened by a huge fire of
mysterious origin.
76   Clerics who have resurrected a long-dead hero discover she’s
not what they thought.
77   A sorrowful bard tells a tale of his imprisoned companions.
78   Evil nobles create an adventurers’ guild to monitor and control
adventurers.
79   A halfling caravan must traverse an ankheg-infested wilderness.
80   All the doors in the king’s castle are suddenly arcane lockedand
fire trapped.
81   An innocent man, about to be hanged, pleads for someone to
help him.
82   The tomb of a powerful wizard, filled with magic items, has
sunk into the swamp.
83   Someone is sabotaging wagons and carts to come apart when
they travel at high speed.
84   A certain kind of frogs, found only in an isolated valley, fall like
rain on a major city.
85   A jealous rival threatens to stop a well-attended wedding.
86   A woman who mysteriously vanished years ago is seen walking
on the surface of a lake.
87   An earthquake uncovers a previously unknown dungeon.
88   A wronged half-elf needs a champion to fight for her in a
gladiatorial trial.
89   At the eye of the storm that tears across the land lies a floating
citadel.
90   People grow suspicious of half-orc merchants peddling gold
dragon parts in the market.
91   An absentminded wizard lets her rod of wonderfall into the
wrong hands.
92   Undead shadows vex a large library, especially an old storeroom
long left undisturbed.
93   The door into an abandoned house in the middle of town turns
out to be a magic portal.
94   Barge pirates make a deal with a covey of hags and exact a high
toll to use the river.
95   Two parts of a magic item are in the hands of bitter enemies;
the third piece is lost.
96   A flight of wyverns is preying upon sheep as well as shepherds.
97   Evil clerics gather in secret to summon a monstrous god to the
world.
98   A city faces a siege by a force of humans, duergar, and gnolls.
99   A huge gemstone supposedly lies within a ruined monastery.
100 Lizardfolk riding dragon turtles sell their services as
mercenaries to the highest bidder.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs
continued from previous page