150
Impeded Magic: Particular spells and spell-like abilities are
more difficult to cast on planes with this trait, often because the
nature of the plane interferes with the spell. Fireball spells may be
cast on the Elemental Plane of Water, but the opposing natures of
the spell and the plane makes it difficult.
To cast an impeded spell, the caster must make a Spellcraft
check (DC 20 + the level of the spell). If the check fails, the spell
does not function but is still lost as a prepared spell or spell slot. If
the check succeeds, the spell functions normally.
Enhanced Magic: Particular spells and spell-like abilities are
easier to use or more powerful in effect on planes with this trait
than they are on the Material Plane.
Natives of a plane with the enhanced magic trait are aware of
which spells and spell-like abilities are enhanced, but planar trav-
elers may have to discover this on their own.
If a spell is enhanced, certain metamagic feats can be applied to
it without changing the spell slot required or the casting time.
Spellcasters on the plane are considered to have that feat or feats
for the purpose of applying them to that spell. Spellcasters native
to the plane must gain the feat or feats normally if they want to use
them on other planes as well.
For example, spells with the fire descriptor are maximized and
enlarged on the Elemental Plane of Fire. Wizards on this plane
can prepare maximized, enlarged versions of their fire spells
even if they don’t have the Maximize Spell and Enlarge Spell
feats, and they use the same spell slots they would to cast these
spells normally (not maximized or enlarged) on the Material
Plane. Sorcerers on this plane can cast maximized, enlarged fire
spells without using higher-level slots, and it takes them no extra
time to do so.
Limited Magic: Planes with this trait permit only the use of
spells and spell-like abilities that meet particular qualifications.
Magic can be limited to effects from certain schools or subschools,
to effects with certain descriptors, or to effects of a certain level (or
any combination of these qualities). Spells and spell-like abilities
that don’t meet the qualifications simply don’t work.
HOW PLANES INTERACT
By definition, planes are infinite or near-infinite expanses,
whether they are flat worlds, layered vaults, or spheres hanging in
space. How, then, can they interact with each other?
As a metaphor, imagine the various planes of a cosmology float-
ing near each other in a three-dimensional constellation or clus-
ter. They are not necessarily “above” or “below” each other, though
there is a social tendency to call good-aligned planes “upper”
planes and evil-aligned planes “lower” planes. What is important
to the D&D cosmology is whether two given planes are separate,
coterminous, or coexistent.
Separate Planes:Two planes that are separate do not overlap or
directly connect to each other. They are like planets in different
orbits. Any Outer Plane, for example, has no direct connection
with the Material Plane. The two planes are separate, and the only
way to get from one plane to the other is to go through a third
plane, such as the Astral Plane.
Coterminous Planes:Planes that touch at specific points are
coterminous. Where they touch, a connection exists, and travelers
can leave one reality behind and enter the other. It’s possible, for
example, to sail from Hades to the Abyss on the River Styx.
Coexistent Planes:If a link between two planes can be cre-
ated at any point, the two planes are coexistent. These planes
overlap each other completely. A coexistent plane can be reached
from anywhere on the plane it overlaps. When moving on a coex-
istent plane, it is often possible to see into or interact with the
plane it coexists with. The Ethereal Plane is coexistent with the
Material Plane, and inhabitants of the Ethereal Plane can see into
the Material Plane. With the right magic, inhabitants of the
Material Plane can likewise see and interact with those on the
Ethereal Plane (see invisibilityand magic missile, for example, both
affect the Ethereal Plane).
THE D&D COSMOLOGY
The D&D cosmology is structured as follows.
The Material Plane is at its center.
The Plane of Shadow and the Ethereal Plane are coexistent with
the Material Plane. All planes, including the Plane of Shadow and
the Ethereal Plane, are coexistent with the Astral Plane, which
envelops the whole cosmology like a cloud.
The six Inner Planes surround the Material Plane. They are sep-
arate from the Material Plane and from each other (they do not
have connections between them). They are each coexistent with
the Astral Plane. Each of the Inner Planes has the appropriate ele-
mental or energy trait.
The Outer Planes are arranged in a great wheel around the
Material Plane. Each Outer Plane is coterminous to the planes on
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS
d%Effect
01–19Spell rebounds on caster with normal effect. If the spell
cannot affect the caster, it simply fails.
20–23A circular pit 15 feet wide opens under the caster’s feet; it is
10 feet deep per level of the caster.
24–27The spell fails, but the target or targets of the spell are
pelted with a rain of small objects (anything from flowers to
rotten fruit), which disappear upon striking. The barrage
continues for 1 round. During this time the targets are
blinded and must make Concentration checks (DC 15 +
spell level) to cast spells.
28–31The spell affects a random target or area. The DM should
randomly choose a different target from among those in
range of the spell or center the spell at a random place
within range of the spell. To generate direction randomly,
roll 1d8 and count clockwise around the compass, starting
with south. To generate range randomly, roll 3d6. Multiply
the result by 5 feet for close range spells, 20 feet for
medium range spells, or 80 feet for long range spells.
32–35The spell functions normally, but any material components
are not consumed. The spell is not expended from the
caster’s mind (a spell slot or prepared spell can be used
again). An item does not lose charges, and the effect does
not count against an item’s or spell-like ability’s use limit.
36–39The spell does not function. Instead, everyone (friend or foe)
within 30 feet of the caster receives the effect of a heal spell.
40–43The spell does not function. Instead, a deeper darkness and a
silence effect cover a 30-foot radius around the caster for
2d4 rounds.
44–47The spell does not function. Instead, a reverse gravity effect
covers a 30-foot radius around the caster for 1 round.
48–51The spell functions, but shimmering colors swirl around the
caster for 1d4 rounds. Treat this a glitterdust effect with a
save DC of 10 + the level of the spell that generated this
result.
52–59Nothing happens. The spell does not function. Any material
components are used up. The spell or spell slot is used up,
and charges or uses from an item are used up.
60–71Nothing happens. The spell does not function. Any material
components are not consumed. The spell is not expended
from the caster’s mind (a spell slot or prepared spell can be
used again). An item does not lose charges, and the effect
does not count against an item’s or spell-like ability’s use
limit.
72–98The spell functions normally.
99–100   The spell functions strongly. Saving throws against the spell
incur a –2 penalty. The spell has the maximum possible effect,
as if it were cast with the Maximize Spell feat. If the spell is
already maximized with the feat, there is no further effect.