assistance. Strong creatures without the ability to open doors
smash them down if necessary. Burrowing creatures might dig
their own exits.
In general, both the PCs and the monsters should be able to
move around a room without too much difficulty. Fighting a battle
in particularly tight quarters can make for an interesting change
of pace, however.
Common dungeon rooms fall into the following broad cate-
gories. Use them as a springboard for your own creations, not as a
limited list.
Guard Post: Intelligent, social denizens of the dungeon will
generally have a series of adjacent rooms they consider “theirs,”
and they’ll guard the entrances to that common area. A guard post
may just be a room with a table where bored gnolls play a dice
game. Or it might be a pair of iron golems backed up by two fire-
ball-casting drow wizards hiding in balconies overhead. When you
design a guard post, decide how many guards are on duty, note
their Listen and Spot modifiers, and decide what they do when
they notice intruders. Some will rush headlong into a fight, while
others will negotiate, sound an alarm, or retreat to get help.
Living Quarters: All but the most nomadic creatures have a
lair where they can rest, eat, and store their treasure. Living quar-
ters commonly include beds (if the creature sleeps), possessions
(both valuable and mundane), and some sort of food preparation
area (anything from a well-stocked kitchen to a fire pit to a hunk
of rotting venison). Noncombatant creatures such as juveniles and
the elderly are often found here.
Work Area: The bugbear fletcher has an alcove where she
makes new arrows for the tribe. The mind flayers have a grisly tor-
ture chamber where they bring their stunned victims for brain
extraction. Most intelligent creatures do more than just guard, eat,
and sleep, and many devote rooms to magic laboratories, work-
shops for weapons and armor, or studios for more esoteric tasks.
Shrine: The ogre in the cave keeps a candle lit next to the skull
of her child, which was killed by human hunters. The kuo-toas
have a series of underwater altars dedicated to their dread god
Blibdoolpoolp. Any creature that is particularly religious may have
some place dedicated to worship, and others may venerate some-
thing of great historical or personal value. Depending on the crea-
ture’s resources and piety, a shrine can be humble or extensive. A
shrine is where PCs will likely encounter NPC clerics, and it’s
common for wounded monsters to flee to a shrine friendly to
them when they seek healing.
Vault: Well protected, often by a locked iron
door, a vault is a special room that contains trea-
sure. There’s usually only one entrance—an
appropriate place for a trap.
Crypt: Although   sometimes   con-
structed like a vault, a crypt can also be a
series of individual rooms, each with its
own  sarcophagus,  or  a  long  hall  with
recesses on either side—shelves to hold
coffins or bodies. Wise adventurers expect
to encounter undead in a crypt, but are
often willing to risk it to look for the treasure
that’s often buried with the dead. Crypts of most
cultures are well appointed and highly decorated,
since the fact that the crypt was created at
all  shows  great  reverence  for  the  dead
entombed within.
Those  who  are  worried  about  undead
rising from the grave take the precaution of
locking and trapping a crypt from the outside—
making the crypt easy to get into but difficult
to leave. Those worried about tomb robbers
make their crypts difficult to get into. Some
builders do both, just to be on the safe side.
CORRIDORS
Stretching into the darkness, a mysterious, cobweb-filled passage
deeper into the dungeon can be intriguing and a little frightening.
All dungeons have rooms, and most have corridors. While most
corridors  simply  connect  rooms,  sometimes  they  can  be
encounter areas in their own right because of traps, guard patrols,
and wandering monsters out on the hunt.
When designing a dungeon, make sure the corridors are large
enough for the dungeon residents to use. (For example, a dragon
needs a pretty big tunnel to get in and out of its lair.) Wealthy,
powerful, or talented dungeon builders may favor wide corridors
to give a grand appearance to their residences. Otherwise, pas-
sages are no larger than they need to be. (Tunneling is expensive,
back-breaking, and time-consuming work.) Corridors narrower
than 10 feet can make it difficult for all the members of the PC
party to get involved in any fights that occur, so make them the
exception rather than the rule.
Corridor Traps: Because passageways in dungeons tend to be
narrow, offering few movement options, dungeon builders like to
place traps in them. In a cramped passageway, there’s no way for
intruders to move around concealed pits, falling stones, arrow
traps, tilting floors, and sliding or rolling rocks that fill the entire
passage. For the same reason, magic traps such as glyphs of warding
are effective in hallways as well.
Mazes: Usually, passages connect chambers in the simplest and
straightest manner possible. Some dungeon builders, however,
design a maze or a labyrinth within the dungeon. This sort of con-
struction is difficult to navigate (or at least to navigate quickly)
and, when filled with monsters or traps, can be an effective bar-
rier. A maze can be used to cut off one area of the dungeon, deflect-
ing intruders away from a protected spot. Generally, though, the
far side of a maze holds an important crypt or vault—someplace
that the dungeon’s regular inhabitants rarely need to get to.
MISCELLANEOUS FEATURES
Any dungeon is made more interesting by the inclusion of some
or all of the following features.
Stairs: The usual way to connect different levels of a dungeon
is with stairs. Straight stairways, spiral staircases, or stairwells
with multiple landings between flights of stairs are all common
in dungeons, as are ramps (sometimes with an incline so slight
that it can be difficult to notice; Spot DC 15). Stairs are important
accessways, and are sometimes guarded or trapped. Traps on
stairs often cause intruders to slide or fall down to the
bottom, where a pit, spikes, a pool of acid, or some other
danger awaits.
Gradual Stairs: Stairs that rise less than 5 feet for every 5
feet of horizontal distance they cover don’t affect move-
ment, but characters who attack a foe below them gain a +1
bonus on attack rolls from being on higher ground. Most stairs in
dungeons are gradual, except for spiral stairs (see below).
Steep Stairs: Characters moving up steep stairs (which rise at a 45-
degree angle or steeper) must spend 2 squares of movement to enter
each square of stairs. Characters running or charging
down steep stairs must succeed on a DC 10 Balance check
upon entering the first steep stairs square. Characters who
fail stumble and must end their movement 1d2×5 feet later.
Characters who fail by 5 or more take 1d6 points of damage
and fall prone in the square where they end their movement.
Steep stairs increase the DC of Tumble checks by 5.
Spiral Stairs: This form of steep stairs is designed to make
defending a fortress easier. Characters gain cover against foes
below them on spiral stairs because they can easily duck
around the staircase’s central support.
Railings and Low Walls: Stairs that are open to large rooms
often have railings or low walls. They function as described
for ledges (see Special Floors, page 60).
63
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES
Illus. by  W. Reynolds
Spiral staircase made of iron