98
To create a wilderness encounter table, first decide what you
want the average Encounter Level to be. Then look at the relevant
list, choosing monsters with Challenge Ratings that fall in a range
from (EL – 6) to (EL + 2). Supplement these choices with selec-
tions from other sources, such as these:
•The Any  Wilderness  Environment  list,  which  includes  wide-
ranging creatures.
•The lists for other climates (adding a few warm forest creatures
to your temperate forest, for example).
•Some NPCs relevant to the area (dwarf barbarians in the moun-
tains, perhaps, or elven druids in the forest).
Now build your encounter table line by line. Strive for some EL
variety on the table. Just as you wouldn’t design a dungeon where
every single room is exactly EL 7, you shouldn’t create a wilder-
ness table where every entry is EL 7.
If a monster’s Challenge Rating is higher than your target EL,
the same number, or 1 lower than your target EL, it can go onto
the table as a solitary monster. If your target EL is 8, you can build
an entry that simply reads “ Treant,” because treants are CR 8.
For monsters that have a CR significantly lower than your target
EL, you’ll want the encounter to feature more than one of those crea-
tures. Table 3–1 (page 49) tells you how many monsters you need for
an encounter of a given EL. Convert that number to an appropriate
die range for the encounter table. For example, if you know you want
an encounter with five gargoyles (individually CR 4) to make an EL
8 encounter, you’ll add a “2d4 gargoyles” entry to the encounter table,
because rolling 2d4 yields an average result of 5.
The organization entries for the creatures in the Monster Manual
can be a big help. They tell you how likely a monster is to congregate
with others of its kind; allips are almost always solitary, for example,
so you don’t want a “2d6 allips” entry on the encounter table. The
organization entries also indicate combinations of monsters that
make an effective encounter. Ettins often keep brown bears as pets,
so an entry of “Ettin and 1d2 brown bears” would be appropriate.
Once you have every entry for your encounter table ready, you
need only assign percentages to the table. You can rigorously adjust
the percentages to ensure that the encounter table yields an average
EL exactly equal to your target EL, but frankly it isn’t necessary.
Simply assign larger chances to the lines you know generate en-
counters close to your target EL, and assign smaller chances to the
lines that have EL significantly higher or lower than your target.
URBAN ADVENTURES
Cities are often the places where characters spend time between
adventures. But urban areas are themselves rich in many of the
elements that make for an exciting adventure: chases through
winding streets, duels in the courtyard, and intrigue during the
king’s banquet. The “cobblestone jungle” of a metropolis can be as
dangerous as any dungeon.
At first glance, a city is much like a dungeon, made up of walls,
doors, rooms, and corridors. Adventures that take place in cities
have two salient differences from their dungeon counterparts,
however. Characters have greater access to resources, and they
must contend with law enforcement.
Access to Resources: A friendly temple of healers might be
just down the street, and a locate objectscroll can be had on a quick
shopping trip. Unlike in dungeons and the wilderness, characters
can buy and sell gear quickly in a city. A large city or metropolis
probably has high-level NPCs and experts in obscure fields of
knowledge who can provide assistance and decipher clues. And
when the PCs are battered and bruised, they can retreat to the
comfort of a room at the inn.
The freedom to retreat and ready access to the marketplace
means that the players have a greater degree of control over the
pacing of an urban adventure. They can obtain healing and replen-
ish their resources after every encounter, if they wish. For this
reason, you have the freedom to use higher-level encounters
against them than you would in a different setting. In a city, you
can provide challenges one or two Encounter Levels higher than
the PCs would face in a dungeon. And conveniently, cities are full
of high-level NPCs that provide those greater challenges.
Law Enforcement: The other key distinctions between adven-
turing in a city and delving into a dungeon is that a dungeon is,
almost by definition, a lawless place where the only law is that of
the jungle: Kill or be killed. A city, on the other hand, is held to-
gether by a code of laws, many of which are explicitly designed to
prevent the sort of behavior that adventurers engage in all the
time: killing and looting. 
Even so, most cities’ laws recognize monsters as a threat to the
stability the city relies on, and prohibitions about murder rarely
apply to monsters such as aberrations or evil outsiders. Most evil
humanoids, however, are typically protected by the same laws
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES
CR  Warm Marshes
1/2  Stirge
2Crocodile (animal)
2Shocker lizard
3Wyrmling black dragon
4Giant crocodile (animal)
4Very young black dragon
5Young black dragon
5Manticore
6Five-headed pyrohydra
7Juvenile black dragon
7Six-headed pyrohydra
8Seven-headed pyrohydra
9Young adult black dragon
9Eight-headed pyrohydra
10   Nine-headed pyrohydra
10   Rakshasa
11   Adult black dragon
11   Ten-headed pyrohydra
12   Eleven-headed pyrohydra
13   Twelve-headed pyrohydra
14   Mature adult black dragon
16   Old black dragon
18   Very old black dragon
19   Ancient black dragon
20   Wyrm black dragon
22   Great wyrm black dragon
CR  Warm Mountains
4Wyrmling red dragon
5Very young red dragon
7Young red dragon
8Young adult red dragon skeleton
9Roc
10   Juvenile red dragon
10   Fire giant
13   Young adult red dragon
13   Storm giant
15   Adult red dragon
18   Mature adult red dragon
20   Old red dragon
21   Very old red dragon
23   Ancient red dragon
24   Wyrm red dragon
26   Great wyrm red dragon
CR  Warm Plains
1/3  Giant fire beetle (vermin)
1/2  Baboon (animal)
1/2  Halfling
1Gnoll
1Mule (animal)
2Cheetah (animal)
3Ankheg
3Lion (animal)
4Rhinoceros (animal)
5Dire lion
5Wyrmling gold dragon
7Very young gold dragon
7Elephant (animal)
8Tyrannosaurus (dinosaur)
9Young gold dragon
11   Juvenile gold dragon
14   Young adult gold dragon
16   Adult gold dragon
19   Mature adult gold dragon
21   Old gold dragon
22   Very old gold dragon
24   Ancient gold dragon
25   Wyrm gold dragon
27   Great wyrm gold dragon
25   Wyrm gold dragon
27   Great wyrm gold dragon