powers is usable for up to 7 minutes at a time, but after a flight
of any duration the cloak cannot bestow any flying power for a
like period of time.
Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous Item, fly, poly-
morph; Price 26,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of Charisma:This lightweight and fashionable cloak has
a highly decorative silver trim. When in a character’s possession, it
adds a +2, +4, or +6 enhancement bonus to her Charisma score.
Moderate transmutation; CL 8th; Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s
splendor; Price 4,000 gp (+2), 16,000 gp (+4), 36,000 gp (+6);
Weight 2 lb.
Cloak of Displacement, Minor:This item appears to be a
normal cloak, but when worn by a character its magical properties
distort and warp light waves. This displacement works similar to
the displacementspell except that it only grants a 20% miss chance
on attacks against the wearer. It functions continually.
Faint illusion; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, displacement; Price
24,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of Displacement, Major:This item appears to be a
normal cloak, but on command its magical properties dis-
tort and warp light waves. This displacement works
just like the displacementspell and lasts for a total of
15 rounds per day, which the wearer can divide up
as she sees fit.
Moderate illusion; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous
Item, Extend Spell, displacement; Price 50,000
gp; Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of Elvenkind:This cloak of neutral
gray cloth is indistinguishable from an ordinary
cloak of the same color. However, when worn with
the hood drawn up around the head, it gives the
wearer a +5 competence bonus on Hide checks.
Faint illusion; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item,
invisibility, creator must be an elf; Price 2,500 gp;
Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of Etherealness:This silvery-gray
cloak seems to absorb light rather than be illu-
minated by it. On command, the cloak makes
its wearer ethereal (as the ethereal jaunt spell).
The effect is dismissible. The cloak works
for a total of up to 10 minutes per day. This
duration need not be continuous.
Strong transmutation; CL 15th; Craft
Wondrous Item, ethereal jaunt; Price 55,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of the Manta Ray:This cloak appears to be made of
leather until the wearer enters salt water. At that time the cloak of
the manta rayadheres to the individual, and he appears nearly
identical to a manta ray (as the polymorph spell, except that it allows
only manta ray form). He gains a +3 natural armor bonus, the abil-
ity to breathe underwater, and a swim speed of 60 feet, like a real
manta ray.
Although the cloak does not enable the wearer to bite oppo-
nents as a manta ray does, it does have a tail spine that can be used
to strike at opponents behind the wearer, dealing 1d6 points of
damage. This attack can be used in addition to any other attack the
character has, using his highest melee attack bonus. The wearer
can release his arms from the cloak without sacrificing under-
water movement if so desired.
Moderate transmutation; CL 9th; Craft Wondrous Item, poly-
morph, water breathing; Price 7,200 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of Resistance:These garments offer magic protection
in the form of a +1 to +5 resistance bonus on all saving throws (For-
titude, Reflex, and Will).
Faint abjuration; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, resistance, cre-
ator’s caster level must be at least three times the cloak’s bonus;
Price 1,000 gp (+1), 4,000 gp (+2), 9,000 gp (+3), 16,000 gp (+4),
25,000 gp (+5); Weight 1 lb.
Crystal Ball:This is the most common form of scrying device,
a crystal sphere about 6 inches in diameter. A character can use
the device to see over virtually any distance or into other planes
of existence, as with the spell scrying (Will DC 16 negates).
Certain crystal ballshave additional powers that can be used
through the crystal ball on the target viewed.
Crystal Ball TypeMarket Price
Crystal ball42,000 gp
Crystal ballwith see invisibility50,000 gp
Crystal ballwith detect thoughts (Will DC 13 negates)51,000 gp
Crystal ballwith telepathy*70,000 gp
Crystal ballwith true seeing80,000 gp
* The viewer is able to send and receive silent mental messages with
the person appearing in the crystal ball. Once per day the character
may attempt to implant a suggestion(as the spell, Will DC 14
negates) as well.
Moderate divination; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item, scry-
ing (plus any additional spells put into item); Weight 7 lb.
Cube of Force:This device is about the size of a large die
(perhaps 3/4 inch across) and can be made of ivory, bone,
or any hard mineral. It enables its possessor to put up a
special wall of force10 feet on a side around her person.
This cubic screen moves with the character and is
impervious to the attack forms mentioned on the
table below. The cube has 36 charges, which are
renewed each day. The possessor presses one face of
the cube to activate a particular type of screen or to
deactivate the device. Each effect costs a certain
number of charges to maintain for every minute (or
portion of a minute) it is in operation. Also, when an
effect is active, the possessor’s speed is limited to the max-
imum value given on the table.
When the cube of forceis active, attacks dealing more
than 30 points of damage drain 1 charge for every 10
points of damage beyond 30 that they deal (40 points
of damage drains 1 charge, 50 points drains 2 charges,
and so forth). Spells that affect the integrity of the
screen, such as disintegrate and passwall, also drain
extra  charges.  These  spells  (given  in  the  list
below) cannot be cast into or out of the cube:
CubeCharge CostMaximum
Faceper MinuteSpeedEffect
1130 ft.Keeps out gases, wind, etc.
2220 ft.Keeps out nonliving matter
3315 ft.Keeps out living matter
4410 ft.Keeps out magic
5610 ft.Keeps out all things
60As normalDeactivates
Attack FormExtra Charges
Horn of blasting6
Wall of fire2
Passwall3
Disintegrate6
Phase door5
Prismatic spray7
Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item, wall of force;
Price 62,000 gp.
Cube of Frost Resistance:This cube is activated or deacti-
vated by pressing one side. When activated, it creates a cube-
shaped area 10 feet on a side centered on the possessor (or on the
cube itself, if the item is later placed on a surface).The tempera-
ture within this area is always at least 65°F. The field absorbs all
253
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Crystal ball