Most campaigns need a blend of episodic and continuing
adventures to be successful and fun. To get the best of both worlds,
it’s possible to string together a number of unrelated episodic
adventures with hints of a continuing plot in the background that
eventually comes to fruition. For example, as the PCs progress
from dungeon to dungeon and ruin to ruin, they hear rumors and
find clues that some subterranean race is preparing to launch a
strike against the surface world. Perhaps, as they delve into dun-
geons, they learn that some of the monsters they face work for the
masterminds, whom they eventually discover to be the mind flay-
ers. Finally, the mind flayers make their move, and the PCs are
there to stop it. Thus, a series of unrelated adventures suddenly
feels like a coherent whole. This is the first step in refining the art
known as plot weaving.
PLOT WEAVING
Plot weaving is what a DM does when he or she runs multiple
adventures at the same time. For example: In one adventure, the
identity of a murderer leads the PCs into conflict with a powerful
assassins’ guild. In the second adventure, the PCs seek a magic
staff rumored to be in the hands of a troglodyte priest. Here’s one
way these adventures can be interwoven.
1. The PCs, in town seeking the magic staff, witness a murder.
When they look into it, they discover the culprit and track him
down. He fights to the death, and on his body they discover a mys-
terious tattoo.
2. They learn that the staff of healingthey seek was stolen by
troglodytes years ago.
3. While they attempt to learn more about the troglodytes and
their lair, an assassin with the same mysterious tattoo attacks the PCs.
4. They head to the caves where the troglodytes live. They
encounter heavy resistance and withdraw.
5. Returning to town again, the PCs find themselves under sur-
veillance and eventually attack from the guild.
6. They go back to the caves and obtain the staff.
7. They return to town and, after learning the location of the
assassins’ guild, confront the assassins directly.
Plot weaving can make your campaign seem less like a series of
adventures and more like . . . well, like real life. This intermingling
of adventures can be difficult to manage, however, and once you
begin to weave more than two or three plots together, players may
feel somewhat dissatisfied with the number of loose ends that
always seem to be left behind relating to one adventure while they
find their characters embroiled in another. Some players don’t
want plots to be interwoven. They prefer to stick with one goal if
possible and don’t start anything new until they feel they have
achieved closure on what is before them. In the above example,
the PCs might ignore the troglodytes and the staff until they have
decisively dealt with the assassins. Ultimately, a good DM runs the
adventures that players want to play by paying attention to the
way they want to play.
BETWEEN ADVENTURES 
When an adventure comes to an end, you should always handle a
few tasks before proceeding to the next one.
AWARD EXPERIENCE POINTS
Even if you award experience points at the end of each game ses-
sion, another XP award is called for at the end of the adventure—
which, presumably, is also the end of the current game session. At
the least, this will be an award commensurate with what the PCs
accomplished to successfully resolve the adventure. It may also
include story awards (see page 40). If a character earns enough XP
to attain a new level, work with that player (either before the game
session breaks up or before the next adventure begins) to modify
his or her character sheet properly.
UPDATE PC INFORMATION
Bring your notes on the PCs up to date, recording such accom-
plishments as new magic items gained, new levels earned, ene-
mies they have angered, friends they have made, and anything
else that’s pertinent. The amount and detail of this information
will vary depending on whether the adventure just concluded was
episodic (featuring characters and challenges the PCs are not
likely to encounter again) or continuing (featuring characters and
challenges that may be recurring or may lead to other, related
characters and challenges).
UPDATE YOUR RECORDS
If you and your players just finished an episodic adventure, you
may not need to spend a lot of time on this task, since little if any
of what the PCs have just gone through will have any bearing on
the future events of the campaign.
If the PCs have just concluded a part of a continuing adventure,
your records need to be more thorough. Be sure your notes on
what happened in the adventure are accurate and sufficiently
complete. Record new NPCs encountered, significant monsters
defeated, secrets learned, magic discovered, and so forth.
In either case, make notes about opportunities for further ad-
ventures based on what has happened in the one just concluded.
Remember what the players seemed to like and dislike, so you can
tailor future adventures accordingly.
THE DUNGEON
Dungeons are deep, dark pits filled with subterranean horrors and
lost, ancient treasures. Dungeons are labyrinths where evil villains
and carnivorous beasts hide from the light, waiting for a time to
strike out into the sunlit lands of good. Dungeons contain pits of
seething acid and magic traps that blast intruders with fire, as well
as dragons guarding their hoards and magic artifacts waiting to be
discovered.
In short, dungeons mean adventure.
THE DUNGEON AS ADVENTURE SETTING
The term “dungeon” is a loose one. A dungeon is usually under-
ground, but an aboveground site can be a dungeon as well. Some
DMs apply the term to virtually any adventure site. For this dis-
cussion, a dungeon is an enclosed, defined space made up of
encounter areas connected in some fashion.
The most common form of dungeon is an underground com-
plex built by intelligent creatures for some purpose. Physically,
such a place has rooms joined by corridors, stairs connecting it
with the surface, and doors and traps to keep out intruders. The
archetypal dungeon is abandoned, with creatures other than the
builders now occupying areas within it. Adventurers explore such
places with the hope of finding treasure either left behind by the
original inhabitants or in the hoards of such squatters.
TYPES OF DUNGEONS
The four basic dungeon types are defined by their current status.
Many dungeons are variations on these basic types or combina-
tions of more than one of them. Sometimes old dungeons are used
again and again by different inhabitants for different purposes.
Ruined Structure: Once occupied, this place is now aban-
doned (completely or in part) by its original creator or creators,
and other creatures have wandered in. Many subterranean crea-
tures look for abandoned underground constructions in which to
make their lairs. Any traps that might exist have probably been set
off, but wandering beasts might very well be common.
Areas within the ruined structure usually contain clues to their
original intended use. What is now the lair of a family of rust mon-
sters might once have been an old barracks, the rotting remains of
the beds and other furnishings now arranged to make nests for the
57
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES