14
CHANGING THE RULES
Beyond simply adjudicating, sometimes you are going to want to
change things. That’s okay. However, changing the rules is a chal-
lenge for a DM with only a little experience.
Altering the Way Things Work
Every rule in the Player ’s Handbookwas written for a reason. That
doesn’t mean you can’t change some rules for your own game. Per-
haps your players don’t like the way initiative is determined, or
you find that the rules for learning new spells are too limiting.
Rules that you change for your own game are called house rules.
Given the creativity of gamers, almost every campaign will, in
time, develop its own house rules.
The ability to use the mechanics as you wish is paramount to
the way roleplaying games work—providing a framework for you
and the players to create a campaign. Still, changing the way the
game does something shouldn’t be taken lightly. If the Player ’s
Handbookpresents the rules, then throughout the Dungeon Master ’s
Guideyou will find explanations for why those rules are the way
they are. Read these explanations carefully, and realize the impli-
cations for making changes.
Consider the following questions when you want to change
a rule.
•Why am I changing this rule?
•Am  I  clear  on  how  the  rule  that  I’m  going  to  change  really
works?
•Have  I  considered  why  the  rule  existed  as  it  did  in  the  first
place?
•How will the change impact other rules or situations?
•Will the change favor one class, race, skill, or feat more than the
others?
•Overall,  is  this  change  going  to  make  more  players  happy  or
unhappy? (If the answer is “happy,” make sure the change isn’t
unbalancing. If the answer is “unhappy,” make sure the change
is worth it.)
Often, players want to help redesign rules. This can be okay,
since the game exists for the enjoyment of all its participants,
and creative players can often find ways to fine-tune a rule. Be
receptive to player concerns about game mechanics. At the
same time, however, be wary of players who (whether selfishly
or innocently) want to change the rules for their own benefit.
The D&D game system is flexible, but it’s also meant to be a bal-
anced set of rules. Players may express a desire to have the rules
always work in their favor, but the reality is that if there were no
challenges for the characters, the game would quickly grow
dull. Resist the temptation to change the rules just to please
your players. Make sure that a change genuinely improves your
campaign for everybody.
ADDITIONS TO THE GAME
As DM, you get to make up your own spells, magic items, races,
and monsters. Your campaign might have a real need for a spell
that turns foes to crystal, or a monster covered in dozens of ten-
tacles that drains heat from living creatures. Adding new races,
spells, monsters, and magic items can be a really entertaining and
rewarding experience.
On the downside, an addition to the game can spoil game bal-
ance. As stated earlier, maintaining balance is an important DM
responsibility. Most unbalancing factors are actually hasty or ill-
considered DM creations. Don’t let that happen to you.
One way to judge whether a new skill, feat, spell, or other op-
tion is balanced is to ask yourself, “If I add this to the game, is it
so good that everyone will want to have it?” At the same time,
ask yourself, “Is this so limited that no one will be interested in
it?” Keep in mind that it’s easier and more tempting to create
something that’s too good rather than not good enough. Watch
yourself.
Making Mistakes
A magic item that allows the characters to move through walls
unhindered, giving them easy access to all sorts of places you do
not want them to go (at least without great effort), is a mistake.
A 4th-level spell that kills multiple foes with no saving throw is
a mistake. A race without a level adjustment that has bonuses of
+4 to Strength and Dexterity is a mistake.
Usually, the mistakes that creep into a campaign are the ones
that seem innocuous at first. A 1st-level spell creating a blast of
wind that knocks a foe down appears to be fine—until a shrewd
player uses it to knock a powerful opponent off the edge of a cliff.
On the other hand, you’ll know right away that you should never
have put a staff of disintegration with unlimited charges in that trea-
sure chest, or you should never have allowed your players to per-
suade you that the game would be more fun if critical hits multi-
plied all damage by five.
When things get unbalanced, you need to fix them either in-
game or out-of-game, depending on the situation and the involved
players’ personalities. Unbalanced character abilities or items are
best handled in-game, but rule changes can only be handled out-
of-game. Sometimes it’s best for you to admit to the players that
you made a mistake, and now it needs to be fixed in order to keep
the game fun, balanced, and running smoothly. The more reason-
able you are, the more likely your players are to understand.
SETTING THE STAGE
It’s worth stating again: Once the game starts, it’s all up to you. The
players are likely to take their cues from you on how to act and
react. If you handle the game seriously, they’ll be more likely to
CHAPTER 1:
RUNNING 
THE GAME
EQUIPMENT FOR RUNNING THE GAME
The  following  kinds  of  equipment  are  available  to  streamline  or
enhance your game. They’re not for everyone, however.
DM  Screen:This  is  a  cardstock  screen  (available  in  many  game  and
hobby stores) that stands up on the table between you and the players. It
has useful tables and rules reminders on it to speed play. You can also clip
notes to it, so you can see them but the players can’t. Behind this screen,
you can put your maps and records on the table, and roll dice where the
players  can’t  see  what  you’re  doing.  The  only  drawback  is  that  a  screen
creates a wall between you and the players, which can be distancing. DMs
who wish to have the information on the screen handy but don’t want to
set  themselves  apart  from  the  players  sometimes  lay  the  screen  flat  on
the table in front of them, hiding adventure notes underneath.
Counters: If you don’t have miniature figures for every character or
creature  the  PCs  encounter,  you  can  use  any  sorts  of  counters  to
represent characters and monsters: printed counters with pictures of
the creatures, poker chips, checkers, coins, scraps of paper—anything
you want. 
Computers: With  a  computer  at  the  table  (or  at  your  side  nearby,
but shielded from players), you can keep all your notes and maps in
electronic  files  easily  searched  and  referenced  during  the  game.
Special  DM  utility  programs  are  available  that  manage  NPCs,  PCs,
monsters, treasure, and other kinds of information. Some will deter-
mine  random  encounters,  create  characters,  and  generate  random
numbers.  Not  all  roleplaying  groups  prefer  to  use  a  computer,
however,  because  of  the  tendency  of  the  machine  to  draw  the  DM’s
attention away from the players and the game. If you find yourself star-
ing at the screen more than at your players, consider scaling back the
computer’s in-game use and restrict it to generating or manipulating
material between sessions.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs