252
centered on the candle. The zone lasts for 1 hour, as the candle
burns. If the candle is snuffed before that time, the effect is can-
celed and the candle ruined.
Faint enchantment; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, zone of truth;
Price 2,500 gp; Weight 1/2 lb.
Cape of the Mountebank:On command, this bright red and
gold cape allows the wearer to use the magic of the dimension door
spell once per day. When he disappears, he leaves behind a cloud
of smoke, appearing in a similar fashion at his destination.
Moderate conjuration; CL 9th; Craft Wondrous Item, dimension
door; Price 10,080 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Carpet of Flying:This rug is able to fly through the air as if
affected by an overland flight spell of unlimited duration. The size,
carrying capacity, and speed of the different carpets of flyingare
shown on the table below. Beautifully and intricately made, each
carpet has its own command word to activate it—if the device is
within voice range, the command word activates it, whether the
speaker is on the rug or not. The carpet is then controlled by
spoken directions.
SizeCapacitySpeedWeightMarket Price
5 ft. by 5 ft.200 lb.40 ft.8 lb.20,000 gp
5 ft. by 10 ft.400 lb.40 ft.15 lb.35,000 gp
10 ft. by 10 ft.800 lb.40 ft.10 lb.60,000 gp
A carpet of flyingcan carry up to double its capacity, but doing so
reduces its speed to 30 feet. It has average maneuverability, but a
carpet of flyingcan still hover.
Moderate transmutation; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item, over-
land flight, permanency.
Censer of Controlling Air Elementals:
This 6-inch-wide, 1-inch-high perforated golden
vessel resembles a thurible found in a place of worship. If
it is filled with incense and lit, summoning words
spoken over it summon forth a Large air elemental.
The summoning words require 1 full round to
speak. In all ways the censer functions as the
summon monster VIspell. If incense of meditationis
burned within the censer, the air elemental is an
elder air elemental instead (as if summon mon-
ster IXhad just been cast). Only one elemental
can be summoned at a time. A new elemen-
tal requires a new piece of incense, which
cannot be lit until after the first elemental
disappears (is dispelled, dismissed, or
slain). See page 95 of the Monster Manual
for details on air elementals.
Strong  conjuration;   CL   17th;
Craft Wondrous Item, summon mon-
ster  VI,  summon  monster  IX;  Price
100,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Chaos Diamond:This lustrous gem-
stone is uncut and about the size of a
human fist. The gem grants its possessor
the following powers:
•Confusion, lesser
•Magic circle against law
•Word of chaos
•Cloak of chaos
Each power is usable 1d4 times per day. (The
DM rolls secretly each day for each power sepa-
rately.)
A nonchaotic character who possesses a chaos diamond gains
one negative level. Although this level never results in actual
level loss, it remains as long as the diamond is in the character’s
possession and cannot be overcome in any way (including restora-
tionspells).
Strong varied; CL 19th; Craft Wondrous Item, cloak of chaos,
magic circle against law, random action, word of chaos, creator must be
chaotic; Price 160,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Chime of Interruption:This instrument can be struck once
every 10 minutes, and its resonant tone lasts for 3 full minutes.
While the chime is resonating, no spell requiring a verbal com-
ponent can be cast within a 30-foot radius of it unless the caster
can make a Concentration check (DC 15 + the spell’s level).
Moderate evocation; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous Item, shout; Price
16,800 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Chime of Opening:A chime of openingis a hollow mithral tube
about 1 foot long. When struck, it sends forth magical vibrations
that cause locks, lids, doors, valves, and portals to open. The device
functions against normal bars, shackles, chains, bolts, and so on. A
chime of openingalso automatically dispels a hold portalspell or even
an arcane lockcast by a wizard of lower than 15th level.
The chime must be pointed at the item or gate to be loosed or
opened (which must be visible and known to the user). The chime
is then struck, a clear tone rings forth, and in 1 round the target
lock is unlocked, the shackle is loosed, the secret door is opened,
or the lid of the chest is lifted. Each sounding only opens one form
of locking, so if a chest is chained, padlocked, locked, and arcane
locked,it takes four uses of a chime of openingto get it open. A silence
spell negates the power of the device. A brand-new
chime can be used a total of ten times before it cracks
and becomes useless.
Moderate transmutation; CL 11th; Craft Won-
drous Item, knock; Price 3,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Circlet of Blasting, Minor:On command, this
simple golden headband projects a blast of searing
light(3d8 points of damage) once per day.
Faint evocation; CL 6th; Craft Wondrous Item,
searing light; Price 6,480 gp.
Circlet of Blasting, Major:On command, this
elaborate golden headband projects a blast of
searing light(5d8 maximized for 40 points of
damage) once per day.
Strong evocation; CL 17th; Craft Won-
drous Item, Maximize Spell, searing light;
Price 23,760 gp.
Circlet of Persuasion:This silver head-
band grants a +3 competence bonus on the
wearer’s Charisma-based checks.
Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous
Item, eagle’s splendor; Price 4,500 gp.
Cloak of Arachnida:This black garment, embroi-
dered with a weblike pattern in silk, gives the wearer the
ability to climb as if a spider climbspell had been placed
upon her. In addition, the cloak grants her immunity to
entrapment by webspells or webs of any sort—she can
actually move in webs at half her normal speed.
Once per day, the wearer of this cloak can cast web. She
also gains a +2 luck bonus on all Fortitude saves against
poison from spiders.
Faint conjuration and transmutation; CL 6th; Craft Wondrous
Item, spider climb, web; Price 14,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Cloak of the Bat:Fashioned of dark brown or black cloth, this
cloak bestows a +5 competence bonus on Hide checks. The
wearer is also able to hang upside down from the ceiling,
like a bat.
By holding the edges of the garment, the wearer is
able to flyas per the spell. If he desires, the wearer can actually
polymorph himself into an ordinary bat and fly accordingly. (All
possessions worn or carried are part of the transformation.) Fly-
ing, either with the cloak or in bat form, can be accomplished
only in darkness (either under the night sky or in a lightless or
near-lightless environment underground). Either of the flying
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Cloak of
arachnida