90
Dense Rubble: The ground is covered with rocks of all sizes. It
costs 2 squares of movement to enter a square with dense rubble.
The DC of Balance and Tumble checks on dense rubble increases
by 5, and the DC of Move Silently checks increases by +2.
Rock Wall: A vertical plane of stone, rock walls require DC 25
Climb checks to ascend. A typical rock wall is 2d4×10 feet tall in
rugged mountains and 2d8×10 feet tall in forbidding mountains.
Rock walls are drawn on the edges of squares, not in the squares
themselves.
Cave Entrance: Found in cliff and steep slope squares and next
to rock walls, cave entrances are typically between 5 and 20 feet
wide and 5 feet deep. Beyond the entrance, a cave could be any-
thing from a simple chamber to the entrance to an elaborate dun-
geon. Caves used as monster lairs typically have 1d3 rooms that
are 1d4×10 feet across.
Other Mountain Terrain Features: Most alpine meadows
begin above the tree line, so trees and other forest elements are
rare in the mountains. Mountain terrain can include active
streams (5 to 10 feet wide and no more than 5 feet deep) and dry
streambeds (treat as a trench 5 to 10 feet across). Particularly
high-altitude areas tend to be colder than the lowland areas that
surround them, so they may be covered in ice sheets (described
below).
Stealth and Detection in Mountains: As a guideline, the
maximum distance in mountain terrain at which a Spot check for
detecting the nearby presence of others can succeed is 4d10×10
feet. Certain peaks and ridgelines afford much better vantage
points, of course, and twisting valleys and canyons have much
shorter spotting distances. Because there’s little vegetation to
obstruct line of sight, the specifics on your map are your best
guide for the range at which an encounter could begin.
As in hills terrain, a ridge or peak provides enough cover to hide
from anyone below the high point.
It’s easier to hear faraway sounds in the mountains. The DC of
Listen checks increases by 1 per 20 feet between listener and
source, not per 10 feet.
Sample Cold Mountains Encounter Table (EL 11)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–041 beholder 13
05–071 young adult silver dragon13
08–191d3 10th-level half-orc barbarian NPCs12
20–291 devourer 11
30–471d3 frost giants11
48–581d4 greater shadows11
59–751 troll hunter11
76–8810th-level drow wizard NPC 11
and 1 shield guardian
89–1002d4 trolls9
Avalanches (CR 7)
The combination of high peaks and heavy snowfalls means that
avalanches are a deadly peril in many mountainous areas. While
avalanches of snow and ice are common, it’s also possible to have
an avalanche of rock and soil. 
An avalanche can be spotted from as far away as 1d10×500 feet
downslope by a character who makes a DC 20 Spot check, treat-
ing the avalanche as a Colossal creature. If all characters fail their
Spot checks to determine the encounter distance, the avalanche
moves closer to them, and they automatically become aware of it
when it closes to half the original distance.
It’s possible to hear an avalanche coming even if you can’t see it.
Under optimum conditions (no other loud noises occurring), a
character who makes a DC 15 Listen check can hear the avalanche
or landslide when it is 1d6×500 feet away. This check might have a
DC of 20, 25, or higher in conditions where hearing is difficult
(such as in the middle of a thunderstorm).
A landslide or avalanche consists of two distinct areas: the bury
zone (in the direct path of the falling debris) and the slide zone
(the area the debris spreads out to encompass). Characters in the
bury zone always take damage from the avalanche; characters in
the slide zone may be able to get out of the way.
Characters in the bury zone take 8d6 points of damage, or half
that amount if they make a DC 15 Reflex save. They are subse-
quently buried (see below).
Characters in the slide zone take 3d6 points of damage, or no damage
if they make a DC 15 Reflex save. Those who fail their saves are buried.
Buried characters take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per
minute. If a buried character falls unconscious, he or she must
make a DC 15 Constitution check or take 1d6 points of lethal
damage each minute thereafter until freed or dead.
The typical avalanche has a width of 1d6×100 feet, from one
edge of the slide zone to the opposite edge. The bury zone in the
center of the avalanche is half as wide as the avalanche’s full width.
To determine the precise location of characters in the path of an
avalanche, roll 1d6×20; the result is the number of feet from the
center of the path taken by the bury zone to the center of the
party’s location. Avalanches of snow and ice advance at a speed of
500 feet per round, and rock avalanches travel at a speed of 250
feet per round.
Mountain Travel
High  altitude  can  be  extremely  fatiguing—or  sometimes
deadly—to creatures that aren’t used to it. Cold becomes extreme,
and the lack of oxygen in the air can wear down even the most
hardy of warriors.
Acclimated Characters: Creatures accustomed to high alti-
tude generally fare better than lowlanders. Any creature with an
Environment entry that includes mountains is considered native
to the area, and acclimated to the high altitude. Characters can also
acclimate themselves by living at high altitude for a month. Char-
acters who spend more than two months away from the moun-
tains must reacclimate themselves when they return.
Undead, constructs, and other creatures that do not breathe are
immune to altitude effects.
Altitude Zones: In general, mountains present three possible
altitude bands: low pass, low peak/high pass, and high peak.
Low Pass (lower than 5,000 feet): Most travel in low mountains
takes place in low passes, a zone consisting largely of alpine mead-
ows and forests. Travelers may find the going difficult (which is
reflected in the movement modifiers for traveling through moun-
tains), but the altitude itself has no game effect.
Low Peak or High Pass (5,000 to 15,000 feet): Ascending to the high-
est slopes of low mountains, or most normal travel through high
mountains, falls into this category. All nonacclimated creatures
labor to breathe in the thin air at this altitude. Characters must
succeed on a Fortitude save each hour (DC 15, +1 per previous
check) or be fatigued. The fatigue ends when the character de-
scends to an altitude with more air.
Acclimated characters do not have to attempt the Fortitude save.
High Peak (more than 15,000 feet): The highest mountains exceed
20,000 feet in height. At these elevations, creatures are subject to
both high altitude fatigue (as described above) and altitude sick-
ness, whether or not they’re acclimated to high altitudes.
Altitude sickness represents long-term oxygen deprivation, and
it affects mental and physical ability scores. After each 6-hour
period a character spends at an altitude of over 15,000 feet, he
must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC 15, +1 per previous check)
or take 1 point of damage to all ability scores.
Creatures acclimated to high altitude receive a +4 competence
bonus on their saving throws to resist high altitude effects and
altitude sickness, but eventually even seasoned mountaineers
must abandon these dangerous elevations.
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES