Power of Nature (Su): Available only to hierophants with druid
levels, this ability allows a hierophant to temporarily transfer one
or more of his druid class features to a willing creature. The trans-
fer lasts anywhere from 24 hours to one week (chosen at the time
of transfer), and while the transfer is in effect,
the hierophant cannot use the trans-
ferred power. He can transfer any
of  his  druid  powers  except
spellcasting and the ability to
have an animal companion.
The druid’s wild shape
ability can be partially or
completely transferred.
For  example,  a  hiero-
phant may transfer the
ability   to   use   wild
shape once per day to
the recipient and retain
the  rest  of  his  uses  for
himself.  If  the  hiero-
phant   can   assume
the  form  of  Tiny  or
Huge animals, the recipi-
ent can as well.
As with the imbue with spell
abilityspell,   the   hierophant
remains responsible to his deity
for any use to which the recipient
puts the transferred abilities.
Spell Power: This special ability increases a
hierophant’s effective caster level by 1 for
purposes of determining level-dependent
spell variables (such as damage or range) and for
caster level checks. This ability can be selected
more than once, and changes to effective caster level
are cumulative.
Spell-Like Ability: A hierophant who selects this
special ability can use one of his divine spell slots to
permanently prepare one of his divine spells as a spell-like
ability that can be used twice per day. The hierophant does not
use any components when casting the spell, although a spell that
costs XP to cast still does so, and a spell with a costly material com-
ponent instead costs him 10 times that amount in XP.
The spell normally uses a spell slot of the spell’s level (or
higher, if the hierophant chooses to permanently
attach a metamagic feat to the spell chosen). The
hierophant can use an available higher-level spell
slot to use the spell-like ability more than once per
day. Allocating a slot three levels higher allows him to
cast the spell four times per day, and a slot six levels higher lets
him cast it six times per day. For example, Lonafin the hierophant
wants to be able to create undead whenever he has the opportu-
nity, so he permanently uses a 9th-level spell slot to get animate
deadas a spell-like ability usable six times per day.
If selected more than one time as a special ability, this ability
can apply to the same spell (increasing the number of times per
day it can be used) or to a different spell.
HORIZON WALKER
The horizon walker is an unceasing traveler to the universe’s most
dangerous places. As her journeys take her from place to place, she
adapts to become one with her environment. In time, she devel-
ops a mystic connection with the ground beneath her. But she is
by no means tied to a particular place; her restless feet are ever
leading her toward the horizon, where new adventures await.
Horizon walkers tend to be hard to surprise or impress, because
they’ve seen so many wonders during their travels. It’s common
for a horizon walker to have an outward attitude of “been there,
done that.” But horizon walkers are gripped by an unquench-
able wanderlust, so they’re always in the midst of a jour-
ney or planning their next one. As
they  travel,  horizon  walkers
develop a magical resonance
with  the  terrain  that  sur-
rounds them, making them
unparalleled    guides    and
scouts. And they’re formida-
ble  foes  when  their  travels
take them into danger, able to
use the terrain they know so
well to good advantage.
Rangers and bards take up
the  path  of  the  horizon
walker   more   often   than
other  characters,  but  that’s
more because they appreciate
the wanderer’s life, not because
the path of the horizon walker
is particularly specialized. A fair
number of horizon walkers were
barbarians who strayed from their
native lands or rogues who found
their skills useful on the road.
Occasionally a druid will adopt
the prestige class, though most
are loath to do so because they sacri-
fice their spellcasting advancement.
You’ll find horizon walkers on the
road, or in places so forbidding that
roads don’t exist. They rarely stay in
one place for long, and they’re eager to
launch a new expedition—the more exotic
and remote the destination, the better.
Hit Die:d8.
Requirements
To qualify to become a horizon walker, a character must fulfill all
the following criteria.
Skills: Knowledge (geography) 8 ranks.
Feats: Endurance.
Class Skills
The horizon walker’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Balance (Dex), Climb (Str), Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal
(Cha), Hide (Dex), Knowledge (geography) (Int), Listen (Wis),
Move Silently (Dex), Profession (Wis), Ride (Dex), Speak Lan-
guage (none), Spot (Wis), and Survival (Wis). See Chapter 4 of the
Player ’s Handbook for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at Each Level:4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are features of the horizon walker prestige
class.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Horizon walkers gain no
proficiency with any weapon or armor.
189
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS
Illus. by B. Snoddy
A hierophant
Table 6–11: The Hierophant
Base
Attack          FortRefWill
LevelBonusSaveSaveSaveSpecial
1st+0+2+0+2Special ability
2nd+1+3+0+3Special ability
3rd+1+3+1+3Special ability
4th+2+4+1+4Special ability
5th+2+4+1+4Special ability