88
The leading edge of a fire (the downwind side) can advance
faster than a human can run (assume 120 feet per round for winds
of moderate strength). Once a particular portion of the forest is
ablaze, it remains so for 2d4×10 minutes before dying to a smok-
ing smolder. Characters overtaken by a forest fire may find the
leading edge of the fire advancing away from them faster than
they can keep up, trapping them deeper and deeper in its grasp.
Within the bounds of a forest fire, a character faces three dan-
gers: heat damage, catching on fire, and smoke inhalation.
Heat Damage: Getting caught within a forest fire is even worse
than being exposed to extreme heat (see Heat Dangers, page 303).
Breathing the air causes a character to take 1d6 points of damage
per round (no save). In addition, a character must make a Forti-
tude save every 5 rounds (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or take
1d4 points of nonlethal damage. A character who holds his breath
can avoid the lethal damage, but not the nonlethal damage. Those
wearing heavy clothing or any sort of armor take a –4 penalty on
their saving throws. In addition, those wearing metal armor or
coming into contact with very hot metal are affected as if by a heat
metal spell (see page 239 of the Player ’s Handbook).
Catching on Fire: Characters engulfed in a forest fire are at
risk of catching on fire when the leading edge of the fire overtakes
them, and are then at risk once per minute thereafter (see Catch-
ing on Fire, page 303).
Smoke Inhalation:Forest fires naturally produce a great deal
of smoke. A character who breathes heavy smoke must make a
Fortitude save each round (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or spend
that round choking and coughing. A character who chokes for 2
consecutive rounds takes 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. Also,
smoke obscures vision, providing concealment to characters
within it.
MARSH TERRAIN
Two categories of marsh exist: relatively dry moors and watery
swamps. Both are often bordered by lakes (described in Aquatic
Terrain, below), which effectively are a third category of terrain
found in marshes.
The table below describes terrain features found in marshes.
The percentages are indicative of typical marsh terrain and don’t
represent the exact chance that a given square will contain the ter-
rain element.
Marsh Terrain Features
— Marsh Category —
MoorSwamp
Shallow bog20%40%
Deep bog5%20%
Light undergrowth30%20%
Heavy undergrowth10%20%
Bogs: If a square is part of a shallow bog, it has deep mud or
standing water of about 1 foot in depth. It costs 2 squares of move-
ment to move into a square with a shallow bog, and the DC of
Tumble checks in such a square increases by 2.
A square that is part of a deep bog has roughly 4 feet of standing
water. It costs Medium or larger creatures 4 squares of movement
to move into a square with a deep bog, or characters can swim if
they wish. Small or smaller creatures must swim to move through
a deep bog. Tumbling is impossible in a deep bog.
The water in a deep bog provides cover for Medium or larger
creatures. Smaller creatures gain improved cover (+8 bonus to AC,
+4 bonus on Reflex saves). Medium or larger creatures can crouch
as a move action to gain this improved cover. Creatures with this
improved cover take a –10 penalty on attacks against creatures
that aren’t underwater.
Deep bog squares are usually clustered together and sur-
rounded by an irregular ring of shallow bog squares.
Both shallow and deep bogs increase the DC of Move Silently
checks by 2.
Undergrowth: The bushes, rushes, and other tall grasses in
marshes function as undergrowth does in a forest (see above). A
square that is part of a bog does not also have undergrowth.
Quicksand: Patches of quicksand present a deceptively solid
appearance (appearing as undergrowth or open land) that may
trap careless characters. A character approaching a patch of quick-
sand at a normal pace is entitled to a DC 8 Survival check to spot
the danger before stepping in, but charging or running characters
don’t have a chance to detect a hidden bog before blundering in. A
typical patch of quicksand is 20 feet in diameter; the momentum
of a charging or running character carries him or her 1d2×5 feet
into the quicksand.
Effects of Quicksand: Characters in quicksand must make a DC 10
Swim check every round to simply tread water in place, or a DC 15
Swim check to move 5 feet in whatever direction is desired. If a
trapped character fails this check by 5 or more, he sinks below the
surface and begins to drown whenever he can no longer hold his
breath (see the Swim skill description, page 84 of the Player ’s Hand-
book, and Drowning, page 304 of this book).
Characters below the surface of a bog may swim back to the sur-
face with a successful Swim check (DC 15, +1 per consecutive
round of being under the surface).
Rescue: Pulling out a character trapped in quicksand can be dif-
ficult. A rescuer needs a branch, spear haft, rope, or similar tool
that enables him to reach the victim with one end of it. Then he
must make a DC 15 Strength check to successfully pull the
victim, and the victim must make a DC 10 Strength check to hold
onto the branch, pole, or rope. If the victim fails to hold on, he
must make a DC 15 Swim check immediately to stay above the
surface. If both checks succeed, the victim is pulled 5 feet closer
to safety.
Hedgerows: Common in moors, hedgerows are tangles of
stones, soil, and thorny bushes.
Narrow hedgerows function as low walls, and it takes 15 feet of
movement to cross them.
Wide hedgerows are more than 5 feet tall and take up entire
squares. They provide total cover, just as a wall does. It takes 4
squares of movement to move through a square with a wide
hedgerow; creatures that succeed on a DC 10 Climb check need
only 2 squares of movement to move through the square.
Sample Temperate Marsh Encounter Table (EL 9)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–071 eleven-headed hydra10
08–111d3 mohrgs10
12–151 young adult black dragon9
16–191d4+2 5th-level kobold sorcerer NPCs9
20–301d3 chuuls9
31–381d3 medusas9
39–451d4+2 5th-level goblin rogue NPCs9
46–531d3 spectres9
54–631d4 will-o’-wisps9
64–701d4 gray render zombies9
71–811 gray render8
82–911 hag covey (sea hag, annis, green hag)8
92–972d4 harpies8
98–1001 shambling mound6
Other Marsh Terrain Elements: Some marshes, particularly
swamps, have trees just as forests do, usually clustered in small
stands. Paths lead across many marshes, winding to avoid bog
areas. As in forests, paths allow normal movement and don’t pro-
vide the concealment that undergrowth does.
Stealth and Detection in a Marsh: In a moor, the maximum
distance at which a Spot check for detecting the nearby presence
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES