64
Bridge: A bridge connects two higher areas separated by a lower
area, stretching across a chasm, over a river, or above a pit. A simple
bridge might be a single wooden plank, while an elaborate one
could be made of mortared stone with iron supports and side rails.
Narrow Bridge: If a bridge is particularly narrow, such as a series
of planks laid over lava fissures, treat it as a ledge (see Special
Floors, page 60). It requires a Balance check (DC dependent on
width) to cross such a bridge.
Rope Bridge: Constructed of wooden planks suspended from
ropes, a rope bridge is convenient because it’s portable and can be
easily removed. It takes two full-round actions to untie one end of
a rope bridge, but a DC 15 Use Rope check reduces the time to a
move action. If only one of the two supporting ropes is attached,
everyone on the bridge must succeed on a DC 15 Reflex save to
avoid falling off, and thereafter must make DC 15 Climb checks to
move along the remnants of the bridge.
Rope bridges are usually 5 feet wide. The two ropes that support
them have 8 hit points each.
Drawbridge: Some bridges have mechanisms that allow them to
be extended or retracted from the gap they cross. Typically, the
winch mechanism exists on only one side of the bridge. It takes a
move action to lower a drawbridge, but the bridge doesn’t come
down until the beginning of the lowering character’s next turn. It
takes a full-round action to raise a drawbridge; the drawbridge is
up at the end of the action.
Particularly long or wide drawbridges may take more time to
raise and lower, and some may require Strength checks to rotate
the winch.
Railings and Low Walls: Some bridges have railings or low walls
along the sides. If a bridge does, the railing or low walls affect Bal-
ance checks and bull rush attempts as described for ledges (see
Special Floors, page 60). Low walls likewise provide cover to
bridge occupants.
Chutes and Chimneys: Stairs aren’t the only way to move up
and down in a dungeon. Sometimes a vertical shaft connects
levels of a dungeon or links a dungeon with the surface. Chutes
are usually traps that dump characters into a lower area—often a
place featuring some dangerous situation with which they must
contend.
Pillar: A common sight in any dungeon, pillars and columns
give support to ceilings. The larger the room, the more likely it has
pillars. As a rule of thumb, the deeper in the dungeon a room is,
the thicker the pillars need to be to support the overhead weight.
Pillars tend to be polished and often have carvings,
paintings, or inscriptions upon them. 
Slender Pillar: These pillars are only a foot or two
across, so they don’t occupy a whole square. Place a
dot in the center of each square that has a slender
pillar in it, and don’t worry about exactly how much
space it takes up. A creature standing in the same
square as a slender pillar gains a +2 cover bonus to
Armor Class and a +1 cover bonus on Reflex saves
(these bonuses don’t stack with cover bonuses from
other sources). The presence of a slender pillar does
not otherwise affect a creature’s fighting space,
because it’s assumed that the creature is using the
pillar to its advantage when it can. A typical slender
pillar has AC 4, hardness 8, and 250 hit points.
Wide Pillar: These pillars take up an entire square
and provide cover to anyone behind them. They
have AC 3, hardness 8, and 900 hit points.
A DC 20 Climb check is sufficient to climb
most pillars; the DC increases to 25 for polished
or unusually slick ones.
Stalagmite/Stalactite: These tapering
natural rock columns extend from the floor
(stalagmite) or the ceiling (stalactite). Stalagmites
and stalactites function as slender pillars,
although  it  is  rumored  that  deep  in  the
Underdark, some wide stalagmites and stalac-
tites exist.
Statue: Reflections of bygone days, stat-
ues found in dungeons can be realistic depic-
tions of persons, creatures, or scenes, or they
can be less lifelike in their imagery. Statues
often serve as commemorative representations
of people from the past as well as idols of gods.
Statues may be either painted or left bare. Some
have inscriptions. Adventurers wisely distrust
statues in dungeons for fear that they may ani-
mate and attack, as a stone golem can do. Statues
in a dungeon could also be a sign indicating the
presence of a monster with a petrifying power
(such as a medusa or a cockatrice). Feel free to uti-
lize both of these ideas, but don’t forget that some-
times a statue is just a statue.
Most statues function as wide pillars, taking
up a square and providing cover. Some statues
are smaller and act as slender pillars. A DC 15
Climb check allows a character to climb a statue.
Tapestry: Elaborately embroidered patterns or scenes on cloth,
tapestries hang from the walls of well-appointed dungeon rooms or
corridors. They not only make chambers more comfortable as a resi-
dence but can add a ceremonial touch to shrines and throne rooms.
Crafty builders take advantage of tapestries to place alcoves, con-
cealed doors, or secret switches behind them. Sometimes the images
in a tapestry contain clues to the nature of the builders, the inhabi-
tants, or the dungeon itself.
Tapestries provide total concealment (50% miss chance) to char-
acters behind them if they’re hanging from the ceiling, or con-
cealment (20% miss chance) if they’re flush with the wall.
Climbing a big tapestry isn’t particularly difficult, requiring a
DC 15 Climb check (or DC 10 if a wall is within reach).
Pedestal: Anything important on display in a dungeon, from a
fabulous treasure to a coffin, tends to rest atop a pedestal or a dais.
Raising the object off the floor focuses attention on it (and, in
practical terms, keeps it safe from any water or other substance
that might seep onto the floor). A pedestal is often trapped to pro-
tect whatever sits atop it. It can conceal a secret trapdoor beneath
itself or provide a way to reach a door in the ceiling above itself.
Only the largest pedestals take up an entire square; most provide
no cover.
Pool: Pools of water collect naturally in low spots in dungeons (a
dry dungeon is rare). Pools can also be wells or natural under-
ground springs, or they can be intentionally created
basins, cisterns, and fountains. In any event,
water is fairly common in dungeons, harbor-
ing sightless fish and sometimes aquatic
monsters. Pools provide water for dun-
geon denizens, and thus are as important
an area for a predator to control as a water-
ing hole aboveground in the wild.
Shallow Pool: If a square contains a shallow
pool, it has roughly 1 foot of standing water.
It costs 2 squares of movement to move
into a square with a shallow pool, and the
DC of Tumble checks in such squares
increases by 2.
Deep Pool:These squares have at
least 4 feet of standing water. It costs
Medium or larger creatures 4 squares of
movement to move into a square with
a deep pool, or characters can swim if
they wish. Small or smaller creatures
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES
Pillar
Statue of a warrior
A pedestal 
displaying a grand gem