bled in the center of the floor—dirt, old leather, scraps of cloth,
and some sticks or bones.
After a short discussion and the formation of a plan, each player
announces an action for his or her character. Tordek looks down the south
passage, Mialee investigates the rubbish in the middle, Jozan looks at the
old sacks, and Lidda looks down the west passage. The players position
their figures on a floor plan the DM has sketched out on paper.
Since no one paid the webs any attention, the DM doesn’t worry about
Spot checks to see the spider.
DM: Okay. As two of you are looking down the passages and
Jozan starts looking at the sacks . . . [The DM rolls a touch attack for
the monstrous spider in the webs. He knows a 14 indicates success because
he wrote down everyone’s AC ahead of time and knows Mialee’s AC is 13.]
. . . Mialee, you feel something land on your shoulder—it feels
hairy and moves toward your neck!
Mialee: Yikes! What is it?
Tordek: If I hear her call out, I’ll turn around. What do I see?
DM: Wait just a minute. First, Mialee, roll for initiative.
Mialee: [Rolls.] I got a 19!
DM: [Rolls initiative for the spider, and gets a 9.] Everyone else
should roll for initiative as well. Tordek, you heard Mialee gasp,
and you turn to see a large, hairy spider on her neck.
Jozan rolls a 10, Lidda an 8, and Tordek a 4.
DM: Mialee, you go first. What do you do?
Mialee: I grab it from my shoulder and throw it to the ground,
where I can stomp on it with my boot.
DM: Okay, but your unarmed attack provokes an attack of
opportunity from the spider, so it bites as you grab at it. [He rolls an
attack roll for the spider, and gets a 16.] Ugh! Mialee, you feel a sharp
prick on your neck. Make a Fortitude saving throw. 
The players all gasp in fear. Mialee rolls a die and would add her Forti-
tude modifier, except that it ’s +0.
Mialee: Fortitude, my worst save! Let’s see—15 plus 0 is, well,
15. Is that good enough?
DM: You feel okay. But the bite still delivers 1 point of damage.
Mialee: Ouch. Okay, then I roll a 14 to grab it and throw it to the
ground. Do I succeed?
DM: Yes. The spider lands on the ground and looks like it’s
going to scuttle away, perhaps back up the wall to the webs above.
Jozan: My turn. I run up to it and smash it with my mace! I roll
a natural 20! With my bonus, that’s 22 in all.
DM: Good roll! You can move that far and attack, so make a roll
to see if that’s a critical hit.
Jozan: [Excitedly rolling again.] Is a 15 good enough?
DM: Yep. Roll damage—twice. Add the results together.
Jozan: [Rolls.] Sweet! Twelve points altogether once I add my
Strength bonus—which also doubled with the crit!
DM: That mighty blow smashes the creature to bits.
Mialee: Cool. Well, now that all the excitement is over, I’m
going to search through this refuse on the floor like I said I would.
DM: Okay. First, make another Fort save to see if there are any
lingering effects from that spider bite.
Mialee: Uh-oh, that doesn’t sound good . . . [Rolls.] . . . a 17! 
DM: No problems, then. You feel fine. Looking at the pile of
debris, you’d guess it’s probably refuse from the spider—leftovers
of its victims and its own castings. Amid bits of bone and tatters of
clothing, you find 19 silver pieces. And make a Search check.
Mialee rolls a 9 and adds her +6 Search modifier for a result of 15—just
enough to notice a hidden gem in the pile!
DM: You see something sparkle inside a small skull. Looking
closer, you see it’s a gem—a garnet.
Mialee: Great! I get it out and put it in my pouch. We can try
to appraise it later. You know, I’m getting a little nervous about
that web.
Lidda: Good point. Jozan, why not light the webs on fire with
your torch?
Jozan: Okay. I do. What happens? [Looks at the DM.]
DM: The webs burn quickly. As they do, tiny burning husks of
smaller spiders fall from the ceiling, but nothing the size of the
creature that attacked.
Tordek: [On lookout.] What do we see down the passages?
DM: The south tunnel runs straight as far as you can see. The
west corridor ends in a door at about 20 feet.
Tordek: Okay, I’ll also glance down the east passage.
DM: You see the east corridor goes straight for about 20 feet and
then turns a corner to head north.
Lidda: Let’s check out that door. [Everyone agrees.]
DM: Okay. You walk down the west passage. The door is a great,
heavy thing with a huge ring of corroded bronze in the center.
Tordek: Mialee, your Listen modifier is better than mine. Why
don’t you listen at this door?
Mialee: Okay. I move forward to do so. [Rolls.] I roll a 13. Do I
hear anything?
DM: You hear a faint moaning sound—you can’t really tell what
it is—that rises and then fades away. The door is hinged on the left
and looks like it pulls inward toward you.
Mialee: I hear moaning on the other side. Let’s get ready for
action! And, by the way, I move to my position toward the back. . . 
Tordek: [Laughs.] All right, I’ll open the door while the elf
scrambles to the back of the line.
DM: Make a Strength check.
Tordek: [Rolls.] I only got a 10. If that’s not good enough, can I
try again?
DM: That’s not good enough, but if you’re willing to spend more
time on it, you can keep trying.
Tordek: [To the other players.] Look, we really want to get through
this door, right? [They agree, so the player turns back to the DM.] I’m
willing to spend enough time to take 20 on my roll. With my
Strength bonus, that gives me a 22.
DM: Ah, easily good enough. After a couple of minutes, Tordek
forces open the stuck door. Immediately a blast of cold, damp air
gusts into the passage where you are, blowing out Jozan’s torch.
Tordek: Do I see anything with my darkvision?
DM: Beyond the door is a chamber with rough walls, not blocks
of stone like the room behind you. It’s 25 feet wide and extends
about 40 feet to the south. A stream spills through the room into a
pool, carrying with it a cold, damp breeze. You don’t see anything
moving around, but some old barrels and buckets are here.
Jozan: I cast lighton a rock, since we’ll never get a torch lit in
this wind.
DM: Okay, now everyone can see.
Tordek: I look at the ceiling and the floor for any more nasty
surprises.
Mialee: I’ll look in the barrels and buckets.
Lidda: Jozan, bring your light over and we’ll check out the pool.
DM: Tordek and Mialee, make Search checks. Lidda and Jozan,
give me Spot checks, since you can’t “search” the pool without get-
ting into it, but you can look into the water to spot anything that
might be there. [The players comply and tell the DM their results,
although the DM knows that there’s nothing for Tordek or Mialee to find.]
There’s nothing alarming about the ceiling and floor, and the
buckets are empty. The pool has some small white fish that look
harmless—they don’t react at all to your light. The pool looks to be
4 to 6 feet deep with a rough and rocky bottom. Jozan, with your
result of 17 you see that what at first seemed to be a rock formation
near the center of the pool looks somewhat like a skeleton.
Jozan: Cool! Mialee, will you cast your own lightspell so I can
toss this rock down into the pool to get a better look at this skele-
ton? It might be something interesting.
Mialee: Okay, I do.
Jozan: I toss the rock that I’ve cast lightupon into the water,
toward the center of the pool.
DM: Your stone falls to the bottom of the pool, illuminating the
center. The formation is clearly a limed-over skeleton—it must
9
CHAPTER 1:
RUNNING 
THE GAME