156
A map of the Great Dismal Delve looks like any dungeon, only
it stretches far beyond what’s available on the Material Plane. The
Great Dismal Delve is a mix of natural caverns and finely worked
passageways. Doors, corridors, and rooms are as likely to be
trapped as they are in the deadliest dungeon, and almost any mon-
ster can be found either lurking in its lair or stalking the PCs
through the hallways.
ELEMENTAL PLANE OF FIRE
Everything is alight on the Elemental Plane of Fire. The ground is
nothing more than great, evershifting plates of compressed flame.
The air ripples with the heat of continual firestorms, and the
most common liquid is magma, not water. The oceans are
made of liquid flame, and the mountains ooze
with molten lava. The plane is a crema-
torium for the unprepared traveler
and an uncomfortable spot even for
the dedicated adventurer.
Fire survives here without
need for fuel or air, but flam-
mables  brought  onto  the
plane are consumed readily.
The elemental fires seem
to feed on each other to
produce a continually
burning landscape.
The Elemental Plane
of Fire has the following
traits.
•Fire-dominant.
•Enhanced  magic.
Spells   and   spell-
like abilities with the
fire  descriptor  are  both
maximized and enlarged
(as  if  the  Maximize  Spell
and  Enlarge  Spell  had  been
used  on  them,  but  the  spells
don’t  require  higher-level  slots).
Spells  and  spell-like  abilities
that  are  already  maxi-
mized  or  enlarged  are  un-
affected by this benefit.
•Impeded  magic.  Spells  and  spell-like
abilities that use or create water (includ-
ing  spells  of  the  Water  domain  and  spells
that  summon  water  elementals  or  outsiders
with the water subtype) are impeded.
Example Plane of Fire Site: City of Brass
The City of Brass is populated by powerful efreet and is considered
by many efreet to be their home and their capital. Efreet may be
found elsewhere on the Elemental Plane of Fire, but even far-
flung settlements owe fealty and allegiance to the grand sultan
who rules the City of Brass from his burning palace. The grand
sultan is said to be an efreeti of singular power and prowess, and is
advised by all manner of elemental nobles. His direct servants,
both in the city and on the Material Plane, are six lords of consid-
erable power.
The city is cradled in a brass hemisphere 40 miles across, float-
ing above a plate of cracked obsidian at the heart of the Elemental
Plane of Fire. Stairs of burning basalt and rivers of flame stream
up from the surface below to the well-armed gates of the city. The
city walls may be breached by flying creatures, but the efreet take
a dim view of interlopers who refuse to present themselves at one
of the city’s gates.
The City of Brass is the best known location on the Elemental
Plane of Fire and is also the most likely to be visited by travelers
from the Material Plane. The air is slightly cooler here; it deals no
damage (unlike everywhere else on this fire-dominant plane), but
it is still stiflingly hot. That doesn’t mean the City of Brass is par-
ticularly hospitable. Every brass wall glows with heat, and casual
contact with the walls deals 1d6 points of fire damage per round.
Even the iron cobblestones glow with heat, dealing 1 point of
fire damage per round. Without the aid of magic, visitors soon
writhe and burn in the streets.
The City of Brass has the mildly evil-aligned trait. Good-aligned
creatures within the City of Brass take a –2 penalty on all Cha-
risma-based checks. This alignment trait is due in part to the
nature of the efreet within the walls, but the city also has a
number of freestanding portals leading to the Nine Hells of
Baator. Devils are common within the
walls of the City of Brass, either
performing  missions  for
their infernal masters or
bringing tribute and gifts
to  the  grand  sultan’s
court.
To make   an   en-
counter map for the
City of Brass, use the
guidelines in the Ur-
ban Adventures section
(page 98), but the build-
ings are half again as tall
as they would be in a
Material  Plane  city,
and   most   have   a
plethora of exterior
staircases,  ledges,
and   balconies.   In-
clude  some  pools  of
magma, which deals 2d6
points of fire damage to
characters who wade
through  it  and  20d6
points of fire damage
to creatures who are
fully immersed. Some
pedestals and sconces
spout blasts of flame
every     1d4     rounds
(dealing 5d6 points of
fire damage to everyone
within 20 feet at initiative
count 0; Reflex DC 14 half ).
At the center of the city are its tallest towers and greatest foun-
tains of flame. Here is the Burning Palace of the Grand Sultan of
All the Efreet, where he rules from the Charcoal Throne. It is said
that within the great palace are wonders beyond belief and trea-
sure beyond counting. But here also is found death for any unin-
vited guest who seeks to wrest even a single coin or bauble from
the treasure rooms of the grand sultan.
Elemental Plane of Fire Encounters (EL 10)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–151d4+2 efreet (genie)12
16–401 elder fire elemental11
41–601d4+2 average salamanders10
61–751 noble salamander10
76–901 greater fire elemental9
91–1001 Huge fire elemental7
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS
Elemental Plane of Fire