agic items are the hallmarks of a legendary campaign.
They are gleaned from the hoards of conquered mon-
sters, taken from fallen foes, and sometimes crafted
by the characters themselves. The most valuable and
coveted of all the sorts of treasure that an adventurer
could hope to find, magic items grant abilities to a character that
he could never have otherwise, or complement his existing capa-
bilities in wondrous ways. Some magic items even have intelli-
gence and are almost NPCs in their own right.
Magic items are divided into categories: armor, weapons, po-
tions, rings, rods, scrolls, staffs, wands, and wondrous items. In
addition, some magic items are cursed or intelligent. Finally, a
few magic items are of such rarity and power that they are con-
sidered to belong to a category of their own: artifacts. Artifacts are
classified in turn as minor (extremely rare but not one-of-a-kind
items) or major (each one unique and extremely potent).
Armor and Shields:Magic armor (including shields) offers
improved, magical protection to the wearer. Some of these items
confer abilities beyond a benefit to Armor Class. For instance, a
character wearing a +2 breastplate of etherealnessis not only pro-
tected by this magically enhanced armor (+2 enhancement bonus
to AC) but can transform her body into an ethereal form.
Weapons:Magic weapons are created with a variety of combat
powers and almost always improve the attack and damage rolls of
the wielder as well. For example, a +3 frost dwarven waraxeadds +3
to attack rolls and damage rolls, and also deals an additional 1d6
points of cold damage.
Potions:A potion is an elixir concocted with a spell-like effect
that affects only the drinker. For example, a potion of gaseous formis
a purplish, oily liquid in a frosted glass vial. It allows a character to
dissolve into a wispy mist and float through cracks.
Rings:A ring is a circular metal band worn on the finger
(no more than two rings per wearer) that has a spell-like
power (often a constant effect that affects the wearer). A
ring of three wisheshas three rubies, each of which holds the
power needed to grant the wearer a single wish,while a
ring of invisibilitycan render its wearer invisible an unlim-
ited number of times.
Rods:A rod is a scepterlike item with a special power
unlike that of any known spell. The rod of lordly might, for
example, can transform into various weapons at the
push of a button, as well as become a ladder, a battering
ram, and more.
Scrolls:A scroll is a spell magically inscribed onto
paper or parchment so that it can be used later. A scroll
of searing lightallows  a  cleric  to  cast  searing lightonce,
as though she had prepared the spell herself, except
that  any  level-based  effects—such  as  range  and
damage—are based on the level of the scroll’s creator,
not the user’s caster level.
Staffs: A staff has a number of different (but
often related) spell effects. For example, a staff of
illuminationis a long shaft of silver, emblazoned
with sunbursts. It has the ability to produce light
in a variety of forms ranging from a mild dancing
lightseffect to the strong, bright light of a sunburst
spell. A newly created staff has 50 charges, and
each use of the staff depletes one or more of those
charges.
Wands: A wand is a short stick imbued with the
power to cast a specific spell. A wand of magic mis-
sileis a useful weapon for a wizard or sorcerer. A
211
Illus. by  A. Swekel