The  Player  Could  Learn  Too  Much:  The strategic use of a
divination spell could put too much information into the
hands of the players, ruining a mystery or revealing a surprise
too soon. The way to avoid this problem is to keep in mind the
capabilities of the PCs when you create adventures. Don’t forget
that the cleric might be able to use her communespell to learn
the identity of the king’s murderer. While you shouldn’t allow a
divination to give a player more information than you want her
to have, you shouldn’t cheat a player out of the effects of her
spells just for the sake of the plot. Remember also that certain
spells can protect someone from divinations such as detect evil
and discern lies—but that’s not really the point. Don’t design sit-
uations that make the PCs’ divinations worthless—design situ-
ations to take divinations into account. Assume that the cleric
learns the identity of the king’s murderer. That’s fine, but the
adventure is about apprehending him, not just identifying him,
and it’s especially important to stop him before he kills the
queen as well.
In short, you should control information, but don’t deny it to
the character who has earned it.
Needing Answers on the Fly:Most likely you won’t know
that a character is going to use a divination spell until the spell is
cast, and so you often need to come up with an answer on the fly.
One of the ways to get around this problem is obvious. To an-
swer a question about what lies at the bottom of the dark staircase,
you have to know what’s there. Chances are you already do know
what’s there, or the character using the divination wouldn’t con-
sider the question worth asking. If you don’t know, then you need
to make something up in a hurry.
More difficult is coming up with a way to convey the infor-
mation. For example, the description of the divinationspell
notes that “ The advice can be as simple as a short phrase, or it
might take the form of a cryptic rhyme or omen.” Cryptic
rhymes are often difficult to come up with in the middle of a
game. One trick is to create a rhyme ahead of time that can fit
just about any question, such as “If X is the seed you sow, reap
you will Y and know,” where X is an action and Y is the result. Or
“If into X fate doth thee send, thou wilt find Y in the end,”
where X is a place and Y is a result or consequence, such as
“danger” or “treasure.”
CREATING NEW SPELLS
Introducing an unbalanced spell does more damage to your
game than handing out an unbalanced magic item. A magic
item can get stolen, destroyed, sold, or otherwise taken away—
but once a character knows a spell, she’s going to want to keep
using it.
When creating a new spell, use the existing spells as bench-
marks, and use common sense. Creating a spell is actually fairly
easy—it’s assigning a level to the new spell that’s hard. If the
“best” 2nd-level spell is invisibility,and the “best” 1st-level spell is
charm personor sleep,and the new spell seems to fall between
those spells in power, it’s probably a 2nd-level spell. (Sleep, how-
ever, is a strange example, because it’s a spell that gets less useful
as the caster gains levels—compared to a spell such as magic mis-
sileor fireball,which gets better, up to a point, for higher-level
casters. Make sure spells that only affect low-level creatures are
low-level spells.)
Here are some pieces of advice to consider.
•If a spell is so good that you can’t imagine a caster not wanting
it all the time, it’s either too powerful or too low in level.
•An  experience  point  (XP)  cost  is  a  good  balancing  force.  An
expensive  material  component  is  only  a  moderately  good
balancing  force.  (Money  can  be  easy  to  come  by;  an  XP  loss
almost always hurts.)
•When determining level, compare range, duration, and target
(or  area)  to  other  spells  to  balance.  A  long  duration  or  a  large
area can make up for a lesser effect, depending on the spell.
•A spell with a very limited use (only works against red dragons)
could conceivably be one level lower than it would be if it had
a more general application. Even at a low level, this is the sort of
spell  a  sorcerer  or  bard  never  takes,  and  other  casters  would
prepare it only if they knew in advance it would be worthwhile.
•Wizards and sorcerers should not cast healing spells, but they
should  have  the  best  offensive  spells.  If  the  spell  is  flashy  or
dramatic, it should probably be a wizard/sorcerer spell.
•Clerics are best at spells that deal with alignment and have the
best selection of curative and repair spells. They also have the
best   selection   of   information-gathering   spells,   such   as
communeand divination.
•Druids are best at spells that deal with plants and animals.
•Rangers  and  paladins  should  not  have  flashy  attack  spells  in
the manner of magic missileand fireball.
•Bard  spells  include  enchantments,  information-gathering
spells, and a mixture of other kinds of spells, but do not include
powerful offensive spells such as cone of cold.
Damage Caps for Spells
For spells that deal damage, use the tables below (one for arcane
spells, one for divine spells) to determine approximately how
much damage a spell should deal. Remember that some spells
(such as burning hands) use a d4 for damage, but fireballuses a d6.
For clerics, a d8 damage die counts as 2d6 for determining the
maximum damage a divine spell can deal. 
35
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
VARIANT: SAVES WITH DIFFERENT ABILITIES
To model  unusual  situations,  you  can  change  the  ability  score  that
modifies a save, just as you can do with a skill (see the sidebar on page
33).  This  is  purely  a  variant,  however,  since  not  all  DMs  want  this
degree of complication.
Fortitude  saves  against  mental  attacks  (such  as  phantasmal  killer)
could be based on Wisdom, making it a cross between a Fortitude and
a Will save. (Apply the character’s Fortitude save bonus from class and
level, then add his Will modifier instead of his Constitution modifier.)
The  DM  may  allow  a  character  to  cast  a  quickened  dimension  door
spell  in  response  to  falling  into  a  pit  trap.  Reacting  quickly  to  a  trap
requires a Reflex save, but in this case the DM might make this a Reflex
save based on Wisdom rather than Dexterity, since casting the spell is
mainly a mental action.
Will  saves  against  enchantments  could  use  Charisma  instead  of
Will, since Charisma reflects force of personality.
Will saves against illusions could be keyed to Intelligence, the abil-
ity that best represents discernment.
As  with  skills,  changes  to  a  saving  throw’s  key  ability  are  always
handled  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Unless  you  institute  changes  to
saving throws as a house rule, these changes are very rare.
Remember that when you change the way a saving throw works
in  this  fashion,  you  should  dictate  when  the  change  comes  into
play—it’s not up to a player to make this sort of decision. Players
may  try  to  rationalize  why  they  should  get  to  use  their  best  ability
modifier  on  a  saving  throw  that  doesn’t  normally  use  that  ability,
but you shouldn’t allow this sort of rule change unles you happen
to agree with it.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs