238
spell has the same width (about 8 1/2 inches) but is an extra foot
or so long for each extra spell. Scrolls that hold three or more
spells are usually fitted with reinforcing rods at each end rather
than simple strips of leather. A scroll has AC 9, 1 hit point, hard-
ness 0, and a break DC of 8.
To protect it from wrinkling or tearing, a scroll is rolled up from
both ends to form a double cylinder. (This also helps the user un-
roll the scroll quickly.) The scroll is placed in a tube of ivory, jade,
leather, metal, or wood. Most scroll cases are inscribed with magic
symbols (see the arcane markspell, page 201 of the Player ’s Hand-
book), which often identify the owner or the spells stored on the
scrolls inside. The symbols often hide magic traps such asglyph of
wardingor fire trapspells.
Activation:To activate a scroll, a spellcaster must read the spell
written on it. Doing so involves several steps and conditions.
Decipher the Writing:The writing on a scroll must be deciphered
before a character can use it or know exactly what spell it contains.
This requires a read magicspell or a successful Spellcraft check (DC
20 + spell level).
Deciphering a scroll to determine its contents does not activate its
magic unless it is a specially prepared cursed scroll. A character can
decipher the writing on a scroll in advance so that he or she can pro-
ceed directly to the next step when the time comes to use the scroll.
Activate the Spell:Activating a scroll requires reading the spell
from the scroll. The character must be able to see and read the
writing on the scroll.
Activating a scroll spell requires no material components or
focus. (The creator of the scroll provided these when scribing the
scroll.) Note that some spells are effective only when cast on an
item or items (for example, Drawmij’s instant summons and snare).
In such a case, the scroll user must provide the item when acti-
vating the spell. Activating a scroll spell is subject to disruption
just as casting a normally prepared spell would be (see Cast a
Spell, page 140 of the Player ’s Handbook). Using a scroll is like cast-
ing a spell for purposes of arcane spell failure chance (such as
from armor).
To have any chance of activating a scroll spell, the scroll user
must meet the following requirements.
•The spell  must  be  of  the  correct  type  (arcane  or  divine).
Arcane  spellcasters  (wizards,  sorcerers,  and  bards)  can  only
use  scrolls  containing  arcane  spells,  and  divine  spellcasters
(clerics,  druids,  paladins,  and  rangers)  can  only  use  scrolls
containing divive spells. (The type of scroll a character creates
is  also  determined  by  his  or  her  class.  For  example,  clerics
create scrolls of divine spells, wizards create scrolls of arcane
spells, and so forth.)
•The user must have the spell on his or her class list (see the spell
lists in Chapter 11 of the Player ’s Handbookfor which classes can
cast which spells).
•The user  must  have  the  requisite  ability  score  (for  example,
Intelligence 15 for a wizard casting a 5th-level spell).
If the user meets all the requirements noted above, and her
caster level is at least equal to the spell’s caster level, she can auto-
matically activate the spell without a check. If she meets all three
requirements but her own caster level is lower than the scroll
spell’s caster level, then she has to make a caster level check (DC
= scroll’s caster level + 1) to cast the spell successfully. If she fails,
she must make a DC 5 Wisdom check to avoid a mishap (see
Scroll Mishaps, below). A natural roll of 1 always fails, whatever
the modifiers.
Determine Effect:A spell successfully activated from a scroll
works exactly like a spell prepared and cast the normal way. As-
sume the scroll spell’s caster level is always the minimum level
required to cast the spell for the character who scribed the scroll
(usually twice the spell’s level, minus 1), unless the caster specifi-
cally desires otherwise. For example, a 10th-level cleric might
want to create a cure critical woundsscroll at caster level 10th rather
than the minimum for the spell (caster level 7th), in order to get
more benefit from the scroll spell. (This scroll would, however, be
more costly to scribe.)
The writing for an activated spell disappears from the scroll.
Scroll Mishaps:When a mishap occurs, the spell on the scroll has
a reversed or harmful effect. The DM determines what sort of mis-
hap occurs, either by deciding on a certain effect to fit the circum-
stances of the encounter or adventure or by choosing from the
possibilities given below.
•A surge  of  uncontrolled  magical  energy  deals  1d6  points  of
damage per spell level to the scroll user.
•Spell  strikes  the  scroll  user  or  an  ally  instead  of  the  intended
target,  or  a  random  target  nearby  if  the  scroll  user  was  the
intended recipient.
•Spell takes effect at some random location within spell range.
•Spell’s  effect  on  the  target  is  contrary  to  the  spell’s  normal
effect. For example, a fireballmight produce a blast of nondam-
aging cold or release a burst of healing energy.
•The scroll user suffers some minor but bizarre effect related to
the  spell  in  some  way.  For  example,  a  fireballmight  cause
smoke  to  pour  from  the  user’s  ears,  a  flyspell  might  turn  the
user’s  arms  into  nonfunctional  wings,  or  a  clairaudience/clair-
voyancespell might cause the user’s eyes and ears to grow to ten
times  their  normal  size.  Most  such  effects  should  last  only  as
long as the original spell’s duration, or 2d10 minutes for instan-
taneous spells.
•Some innocuous item or items appear in the spell’s area. For
example,  a  fireballmight  cause  a  rain  of  lit  torches  to  fall  in
the  target  area;  a  feather  fallspell  might  produce  a  cloud  of
feathers;  a  passwallspell  might  cause  a  (nonfunctional)  door
to appear.
•Spell has delayed effect. Sometime within the next 1d12 hours,
the spell activates. If the scroll user was the intended recipient,
the spell takes effect normally. If the user was not the intended
recipient, the spell goes off in the general direction of the orig-
inal recipient or target, up to the spell’s maximum range, if the
target has moved away.
Random Generation:To generate scrolls randomly, first roll
on Table 7–20: Scroll Types to determine whether the spells are
arcane or divine. Then randomly determine how many spells are
on the scroll, according to Table 7–21: Number of Spells on a
Scroll. For each spell, roll on Table 7–22: Scroll Spell Levels to
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Table 7–20: Scroll Types
d% rollType
01–70Arcane
71–100Divine
Table 7–21: Number of Spells on a Scroll
Scroll TypeNumber of Spells
Minor scroll1d3 spells
Medium scroll1d4 spells
Major scroll1d6 spells
Table 7–22: Scroll Spell Levels
MinorMediumMajorSpell LevelSpell’s Caster Level
1
01–05——01st
06–50——1st1st
51–9501–05—2nd3rd
96–10006–65—3rd5th
—66–9501–054th7th
—96–10006–505th9th
——51–706th11th
——71–857th13th
——86–958th15th
——95–1009th17th
1 These numbers assume that the creator is a cleric, druid, or wizard.