If the players do not seem to have understood something you
said, say it again. Sometimes important points are lost among lots
of new description. Don’t be afraid to repeat that a great deal of
heat comes up from the grate, or each time the dragonne moves,
the ceiling rumbles and dust shakes down onto the floor. The
worst that can happen is that players are reminded how important
the statement is, and they will act accordingly.
When a character moves, add background. Say “ The manticore
moves away from the opening in the far wall, where the foul smell
seems to originate,” or “ The barbarian steps even closer to the pit,”
or “ The roper slides slowly across the uneven floor.” When a char-
acter uses an object, describe the object. “ The warrior slashes you
with his wavy-bladed dagger” is much better than “He hits you for
3 points of damage.”
The tone of your descriptions controls the flow of an encounter
and the mood that the encounter projects over the entire group. If
you speak quickly and intently, this lends intensity to the action. If
your words are frantic, they will make the mood of the scene seem
urgent and desperate.
Sometimes it’s effective to add a little pantomime to your de-
scriptions. If a PC’s opponent raises his huge two-handed sword
above his head to attack the character, raise your hands as if you
are grasping the sword’s hilt. When someone takes a terrible hit in
battle, flinch or recoil with a momentary look of mock pain. If the
PCs are fighting a giant, stand up when the giant takes his actions,
looking down at the seated players.
Sometimes it’s hard to avoid saying “You miss. He hits. You
take 12 points of damage.” And sometimes, that’s okay. Long
verbal descriptions can get tedious to give and to hear, and the
game effects are the important things. However, that’s the
exception, not the rule. Most of the time, at the very least, make
that “He ducks, and slashes with his longsword for 12 points of
damage.” It is usually better in a descriptive way to talk about
dealing damage rather than taking damage. “Its claws rake for 8
points” is at least somewhat interesting, but “You take 8 points”
describes nothing.
Remember, too, that an attack that does not deal damage is not
always a miss in the ordinary sense of the word. Heavily armored
characters may be frequently hit, but their armor protects them. If
you say “His short sword glances off your plate armor,” this not
only describes the action, but makes the player feel good about his
choice to spend extra gold on the good armor.
NPC Actions
When an NPC takes a combat action, the players sometimes need
to have a clue about what’s going on—both in the fictional reality
of the game and in terms of the game’s mechanics. This means that
when a lizardfolk with a crossbow is taking a ready action to cover
the area in front of a door, the players should have a pretty good
idea that if they move in front of that door, the lizardfolk is going
to shoot them.
You need to think about what various actions look like while
they’re happening. If you were all watching the combat in a movie,
what would you see when a character casts a spell or does some-
thing else that none of you have ever seen a real person do? Be dra-
matic, and describe the action fully, but avoid overexplaining,
because that will slow down the flow of the action. Be consistent
as well, because your words are not just description, they’re cues
by which the players make game decisions. If the last time some-
one used the aid another action, you described it as “distracting”
and “harrying,” use those words again. If that means that pretty
soon your players listen to your description and then say, “Ooh,
the wizard must be casting a spell,” you have accomplished some-
thing good—the players have learned your verbal cues to spell-
casting. Not only does that allow them to make good decisions
based on your descriptions, but it lends believability to the fic-
tional world you are creating.
Here are some vivid descriptions you can use to tell players
what’s going on when a character takes a certain action.
ActionDescription
Charge“He lunges forward at full speed, eyes full of
violence.”
Full defense“She raises her weapon and watches your
attacks, attempting to parry each one.”
Aid another“While his ally attacks, he darts in and out of
the fight, distracting his foe.”
Ready a “He’s got his weapon trained on that 
ranged weaponarea, obviously waiting for something.”
Cast a spell“He moves his hands in a deliberate manner
and utters words that sound more like an
invocation than a sentence.”
Cast a stilled spell“She speaks a few short words, staring
intently.”
Cast a quickened “With a word and a flick of his hand, . . .”
spell
Cast a silenced “She does nothing but make a powerful 
spellgesture.”
Use a special ability“Without using words or gestures, she calls
upon some power within herself, using her
great will and inner strength.”
Activate a “He focuses intently on his item, 
magic itemdrawing power from it.”
Delay“She’s looking around, sizing up the
situation, and waiting to react.”
Interesting Combats
The spiral pathway rose up to the circular platform where the sev-
enteen magical gems were held in stasis. Below the path, a
seething pit of raw, explosive magical energy waited like an open
maw. The four adventurers climbed up the path, eager to reach
their goal, but suddenly a quasit swooped down from some hidden
recess. Tordek drew his axe, knowing that fighting on this narrow
path would be difficult and dangerous. He wasn’t sure what would
happen if one of them fell into that magical energy, but he didn’t
want to find out.
While  any  combat  can  be  exciting,  you  should  occasionally
have  the  PCs  face  opponents  in  a  nontraditional  setting.  Some-
times mounted combat, or aerial combat, can provide a change of
pace,  and  underwater  settings  can  be  interesting  as  well.  A  short
list of other suggestions appears below.
FactorGame Effect
Pits, chasms, bridges,Characters can attempt to push
and  ledgesopponents  with  a  bull  rush  (see  page  154  of
the Player’s Handbook).
FogConcealment (20% miss chance) for everyone
involved.
Whirling blades or Characters must make DC 13 Reflex saves
giant,  spinning  gearseach  round  or  take  6d6  points  of  slashing  or
bludgeoning damage.
Steam  ventsOne  random  character  must  make  a  DC  15
Reflex  save  each  round  or  take  3d6  points  of
damage from the heat.
Rising or lowering Characters can only melee opponents at the
platformssame elevation;  platforms  change  elevation
every other round.
Ice or other slipperyCharacters must make DC 10 Balance checks 
surfaceseach  round  or  fall  prone,  and  then  spend  a
move action to stand.
For more ideas, see The Environment in Chapter 8: Glossary,
Chapter 3: Adventures, or take inspiration from an exciting
action movie or book.
17
CHAPTER 1:
RUNNING 
THE GAME