enmity of the outsider can’t be ended until one of the parties has
been slain. Determine the outsider randomly, and assume that it
attacks the character (or plagues her life in some way) within
1d20 days.
Fool:The payment of XP and the redraw are mandatory. This
card is always discarded when drawn, unlike all others except the
jester.
Gem:This card indicates wealth. The jewelry is all gold set with
gems, each piece worth 2,000 gp, the gems 1,000 gp value each.
Idiot:This card causes the drain of 1d4+1 points of Intelligence
immediately. The additional draw is optional.
Jester:This card is always discarded when drawn, unlike all
others except the fool. The redraws are optional.
Key:The magic weapon granted must be one usable by the char-
acter; use the weapon tables beginning with Table 7–10: Weapon
Type Determination until a useful item is awarded. It suddenly
appears out of nowhere in the character’s hand.
Knight:The fighter appears out of nowhere and serves loyally
until death. He or she is of the same race (or kind) and gender as
the character. (See Chapter 4 of this book for typical NPC statistics
for a 4th-level fighter.)
Moon:This card sometimes bears the image of a moonstone gem
with the appropriate number of wishesshown as gleams therein;
sometimes it depicts a moon with its phase indicating the number
of wishes(full = four; gibbous = three; half = two; quarter = one).
These wishesare the same as those granted by the 9th-level wizard
spell and must be used within a number of minutes equal to the
number received.
Rogue:When this card is drawn, one of the character’s NPC
friends (preferably a cohort) is totally alienated and forever after
hostile. If the character has no cohorts, the enmity of some pow-
erful personage (or community, or religious order) can be substi-
tuted. The hatred is secret until the time is ripe for it to be revealed
with devastating effect.
Ruin:As implied by its name, when this card is drawn, all non-
magical possessions of the drawer are lost.
Skull:A dread wraith (see page 258 of the Monster Manual)
appears. Treat this creature as an unturnable undead. The character
must fight it alone—if others help, they get dread wraiths to fight
as well. If the character is slain, she is slain forever and cannot be
revived, even with a wishor a miracle.
Star:The 2 points are added to any ability the character chooses.
They cannot be divided among two abilities.
Sun:Roll for a medium wondrous item (Table 7–28: Medium
Wondrous Items) until a useful item is indicated.
Talons:When this card is drawn, every magic item owned or
possessed by the character is instantly and irrevocably gone.
Throne:The character becomes a true leader in people’s eyes. The
castle gained appears in any open area she wishes (but the decision
where to place it must be made within 1 hour).
Vizier:This card empowers the character drawing it with the
one-time ability to call upon a source of wisdom to solve any
single problem or answer fully any question upon her request. The
query or request must be made within one year. Whether the
information gained can be successfully acted upon is another
question entirely.
The Void:This black card spells instant disaster. The character’s
body continues to function, as though comatose, but her psyche is
trapped in a prison somewhere—in an object on a far plane or
planet, possibly in the possession of an outsider. A wishor a mira-
cledoes not bring the character back, instead merely revealing the
plane of entrapment. Draw no more cards.
Strong (all schools); CL 20th.
Hammer of Thunderbolts:This +3 Large returning warhammer
deals 4d6 points of damage on any hit. Further, if the wielder
wears a belt of giant Strengthand gauntlets of ogre powerand he knows
that the hammer is a hammer of thunderbolts(not just a +3 war-
hammer), the weapon can be used to full effect: It gains a total +5
enhancement bonus, allows all beltand gauntletbonuses to stack
(only when using this weapon), and strikes dead any giant upon
whom it scores a hit (Fortitude DC 20 negates the death effect but
not the damage).
When hurled, on a successful attack the hammer emits a great
noise, like a clap of thunder, causing all creatures within 90 feet to
be stunned for 1 round (Fortitude DC 15 negates). The hammer’s
range increment is 30 feet.
Strong evocation, necromancy, and transmutation; CL 20th;
Weight 15 lb.
Philosopher’s Stone: This rare substance appears to be an ordi-
nary, sooty piece of blackish rock. If the stone is broken open
(break DC 20), a cavity is revealed at the stone’s heart. This cavity is
lined with a magical type of quicksilver that enables any arcane
spellcaster to transmute base metals (iron and lead) into silver and
gold. A single philosopher ’s stonecan turn from up to 5,000 pounds
of iron into silver, or up to 1,000 pounds of lead into gold. How-
ever, the quicksilver becomes unstable once the stone is opened
and loses its potency within 24 hours, so all transmutations must
take place within that period.
The quicksilver found in the center of the stone may also be put
to another use. If mixed with any curepotion while the substance
is still potent, it creates a special oil of lifethat acts as a true resurrec-
tionspell for any dead body it is sprinkled upon.
Strong transmutation; CL 20th; Weight 3 lb.
Sphere of Annihilation:A sphere of annihilationis a globe of
absolute blackness, a ball of nothingness 2 feet in diameter. The
object is actually a hole in the continuity of the multiverse. Any
matter that comes in contact with a sphere is instantly sucked into
the void, gone, and utterly destroyed. Only the direct intervention
of a deity can restore an annihilated character.
A sphere of annihilationis static, resting in some spot as if it were
a normal hole. It can be caused to move, however, by mental effort
(think of this as a mundane form of telekinesis, too weak to move
actual objects but a force to which the sphere, being weightless, is
sensitive). A character’s ability to gain control of asphere of annihi-
lation(or to keep controlling one) is based on the result of a con-
trol check against DC 30 (a move action). A control check is 1d20
+ character level + character Int modifier. If the check succeeds,
the character can move the sphere (perhaps to bring it into contact
with an enemy) as a free action.
Control of a sphere can be established from as far away as 40
feet (the character need not approach too closely). Once control is
established, it must be maintained by continuing to make control
checks (all DC 30) each round. For as long as a character maintains
control (does not fail a check) in subsequent rounds, he can con-
trol the sphere from a distance of 40 feet + 10 feet per character
level. The sphere’s speed in a round is 10 feet +5 feet for every 5
points by which the character’s control check result in that round
exceeded 30.
If a control check fails, the sphere slides 10 feet in the direction
of the character attempting to move it.
If two or more creatures vie for control of a sphere of annihilation,
the rolls are opposed. If none are successful, the sphere slips
toward the one who rolled lowest.
Should a gatespell be cast upon a sphere of annihilation, there is a
50% chance (01–50 on d%) that the spell destroys it, a 35% chance
(51–85) that the spell does nothing, and a 15% chance (86–100) that
a gap is torn in the spatial fabric, catapulting everything within a
180-foot radius into another plane (see page 151 for a way to deter-
mine this randomly). If a rod of cancellationtouches a sphere of anni-
hilation, they negate each other in a tremendous explosion. Every-
thing within a 60-foot radius takes 2d6×10 points of damage. Dispel
magicand Mordenkainen’s disjunctionhave no effect on a sphere.
See also talisman of the sphere(below).
Strong transmutation; CL 20th.
279
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS