22
STARTING AN ENCOUNTER
An encounter can begin in one of three situations.
•One side becomes aware of the other and thus can act first.
•Both sides become aware of each other at the same time.
•Some, but not all, creatures on one or
both  sides  become  aware  of  the
other side.
When you decide that it is
possible for either side to
become   aware   of   the
other, use Spot checks,
Listen checks, sight
ranges, and so on
to    determine
which of the
three above
cases
comes   into   play.
Although it’s good
to give characters
some  chance  to
detect  a  coming
encounter, ultimately it’s you
who  decides  when  the  first
round begins and where each
side is when it does.
One Side Aware First: In
this  case,  you  determine
how much time the aware
side has before the unaware side
can  react.  Sometimes,  the
unaware side has no time to
do anything before the aware
side gets a chance to interact.
If so, the character or party
that is aware gets to take a stan-
dard action before initiative is rolled, while the unaware character
or party does nothing and is caught flat-footed. During this time,
the unaware character or party gains no Dexterity bonus to AC.
After this action, both sides make initiative checks to determine
the order in which the participants act.
Other times, the aware side has a few rounds to prepare. (If its
members see the other side off in the distance, heading their way,
for example.) You should track time in rounds at this point to
determine  how  much  the
aware characters can accom-
plish. Once the two sides come
into contact, the aware characters
can take a standard action while the
unaware characters do nothing. Keep in
mind   that   if
the aware char-
acters  alert  the
unaware side before actual contact is
made,  then  both  sides  are  treated  as
aware.
Example (Sudden Awareness):A kobold
sorcerer with darkvision sees a party
of adventurers coming down a long
hallway. He can see the adventurers,
since they’ve got light, but they can’t
see him because he’s out of the
range of their illumination. The
sorcerer gets a standard action
and casts lightning bolt at the
party. Caught unaware, the
party can do nothing but roll
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
VARIANT: ROLL INITIATIVE EACH ROUND
Some  players  find  combat  more  fun  if  they  get  to  roll  initiative  every
round  rather  than  rolling  once  at  the  beginning  of  the  encounter.
Rather  than  determining  a  sequence  of  actions  for  each  round  at  the
beginning  of  an  encounter,  the  players  and  DM  reroll  for  all  combat-
ants, determining a different sequence at the start of each new round.
The goal is to give the combat a feeling of shifting variability.
Ultimately, this variant rule doesn’t change things much. You’ll find
that it slows down play, because a new sequence of activity will need
to  be  determined  each  round—more  die  rolling,  more  calculation,
more organizing time. It doesn’t change spell durations, or how vari-
ous  combat  actions  work.  Effects  that  last  until  the  character’s  next
action  still  operate  that  way.  The  difference  is  that  it’s  possible  for
someone to take an action at the end of one round (such as a charge
attack) that puts him at a penalty until his next action, and then to roll
well  in  the  next  round  so  that  he  goes  first  and  the  penalty  has  no
effect. This means that sometimes it can be beneficial to roll low for
initiative in a round.
And consider this case: A wizard wants to cast a spell unhindered by
the  oncoming  monk  who  rushes  toward  him.  He  knows  that  if  the
monk reaches him, it will be difficult to cast a spell without drawing an
attack  of  opportunity  from  her.  He  thinks  to  himself  that  his  actions
will  depend  on  whether  he  wins  initiative  in  this  round  (you  need  to
keep this sort of change in approach in mind if you use this variant).
Meanwhile, the monk wants to reach the wizard and use her stunning
attack  to  keep  him  from  casting  spells.  They  roll  initiative,  and  the
wizard wins, casting a spell on the monk (but the monk saves and isn’t
affected).  The  monk  runs  forward  and  stuns  the  wizard,  a  condition
that  lasts  until  the  monk’s  next  action.  In  the  next  round,  the  monk
wins  initiative  again,  and  attacks  but  misses.  Now  the  wizard  casts
another  spell—but  because  he  lost  initiative  in  this  round,  and  acted
after the monk’s action, the fact that he was stunned hardly hindered
him at all.
If you roll initiative each round, taking a readied action later in the
same round or delaying an action until later in the same round gives
you a cumulative –2 penalty on later initiative rolls. (The first time you
do  this  causes  a  –2  penalty;  if  you  take  a  readied  action  later  in  the
same  round  or  delay  an  action  until  later  in  the  same  round  again
during the current combat, the penalty becomes –4, and so on.) Taking
a  readied  action  in  the  next  round  or  delaying  until  the  next  round
carries no penalty, but you get no other action that round.
Even if you normally use a single set of initiative rolls for the whole
combat, some turn of events could make it worthwhile to reroll initia-
tive. For example, the PCs are fighting a drow wizard using greater invis-
ibility.It’s a climactic encounter with the survival of the party hinging
on it. The drow, on his turn, walks within 30 feet of Jozan, who has cast
invisibility purge.Suddenly, the drow is visible. Under normal initiative
rules, whoever happens to act next would be able to attack the newly
visible  drow.  Aside  from  game  mechanics,  there’s  no  good  reason  to
let that character act first. Additionally, everyone else will get one turn
before  the  drow  gets  to  act  again.  Instead  of  following  the  previous
order, you can call for everyone—the drow included—to roll initiative
again to see how fast each character reacts to the new condition (the
drow becoming visible).
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs