n your role as Dungeon Master, you’re the focus of the game. If the
game’s fun, it will be to your credit. If it’s a failure, you’ll get the
blame, whether it’s deserved or not. Don’t worry, though—run-
ning a D&D® game is not as hard as it may seem at first. (But don’t
tell the players that!)
WHAT IS A DM?
Dungeon Mastering involves writing, teaching, acting, referee-
ing, arbitrating, and facilitating. Described below are the different
duties of the DM. You’ll find that you like some more than others.
As in any hobby, focus on what you enjoy the most, but remember
that all the other duties are also important.
PROVIDING ADVENTURES
Your primary role in the game is to present adventures in which
the other players can roleplay their characters. To accomplish
this, you need to spend time outside the game sessions them-
selves, preparing. This is true whether you write your own adven-
tures or use prepared adventures that you have purchased.
Writing Adventures
Creating adventures takes a great deal of time. Many DMs find
that they spend more time getting ready for the game than they
do at the table actually playing. These same DMs often find this
creation time to be the most fun and rewarding part of being a
Dungeon Master. Making up interesting characters, settings,
plots, and challenges to present before your friends can be a great
creative outlet.
Writing good adventures is so important that it receives its
own chapter in this book. See Chapter 3: Writing an Adventure.
Using Purchased Adventures
Many published adventures are available for you to pur-
chase if you don’t want to write one of your own, or if you
just want a change of pace. In a published adventure, you’ll
get a pregenerated scenario with all the maps, NPCs, mon-
sters, and treasures you need, and an adventure plot
designed to make the most of them. Sometimes, when
you use a published adventure, you’ll see that it presents
challenges you would have never thought of on your
own.
Remember, however, that you’re the one who has to
run the adventure: Anything you want to change, you
can. In fact, you will often find you need to make at least
small changes to fit the adventure into your ongoing
campaign and to get your players into the action. You
can have a great deal of fun replacing the villain of an
adventure with one the players have already heard of
in your campaign, or changing the background of the
adventure so that it involves your players’ characters
in ways that the module’s designer never could have
possibly imagined.
TEACHING THE GAME
Sometimes it’s going to be your responsibility to
teach newcomers to the game how to play. This isn’t
a burden, but a wonderful opportunity. Teaching
other people how to play provides you with new play-
ers and allows you to set them on the path to becoming
top-notch roleplayers. It’s easier to learn to play with
someone who already knows the game. Those who
are taught by a good teacher who runs a fun game
5
Illus. by  A. Swekel