either side of it but separate from the other Outer Planes. The
exception is the Concordant Domain of the Outlands, which is
coterminous to every other Outer Plane and thus serves as a cen-
tral hub for dealings between outsiders.
The Outer Planes are coexistent with the Astral Plane. They are
separate from the Ethereal Plane and the Plane of Shadow, so cer-
tain spells (ethereal jaunt,for example) aren’t available to a caster on
the Outer Planes. Each Outer Planes is made up of related layers
(see Layered Planes, below), and the most common access to an
Outer Plane is through the top layer of each plane. The good-
aligned planes, also called the celestial planes or the upper planes,
are linked by the path of the River Oceanus. The evil-aligned
planes, also called the infernal planes or the lower planes, are
linked by the path of the River Styx.
A large number of finite demiplanes connect all over the place.
Individual conduits, freestanding portals, and vortices are also
common.
Layered Planes
Infinities may be broken into smaller infinities, and planes into
smaller, related planes. These layers are effectively separate planes
of existence, and each layer can have its own planar traits. Layers
are connected to each other through a variety of planar gates, nat-
ural vortices, paths, and shifting borders.
Access to a layered plane from elsewhere usually happens on a
specific layer: the first layer of the plane, which can be either the
top layer or the bottom layer, depending on the specific plane.
Most fixed access points (such as portals and natural vortices)
reach this layer, which makes it the gateway for other layers of the
plane. The plane shiftspell also deposits the spellcaster on the first
layer of the plane.
All layers of a plane are connected to the Astral Plane, so travel-
ers can reach specific layers directly through spells such as astral
projection. Often the first layer is the one most hospitable to planar
travelers.
Random Planar Destinations
Spells such as prismatic sprayand banishment may send an individ-
ual to a random plane. To determine where a character winds up,
roll on Table 5–7: Random Planar Destinations.
Table 5–7: Random Planar Destinations
d%Plane
01–05Heroic Domains of Ysgard
06–10Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo
11–15Windswept Depths of Pandemonium
16–20Infinite Layers of the Abyss
21–25Tarterian Depths of Carceri
26–30Gray Waste of Hades
31–35Bleak Eternity of Gehenna
36–40Nine Hells of Baator
41–45Infernal Battlefield of Acheron
46–50Clockwork Nirvana of Mechanus
51–55Peaceable Kingdoms of Arcadia
56–60Seven Mounting Heavens of Celestia
61–65Twin Paradises of Bytopia
66–70Blessed Fields of Elysium
71–75Wilderness of the Beastlands
76–80Olympian Glades of Arborea
81–89Concordant Domain of the Outlands
90–91Elemental Plane of Fire
92–93Elemental Plane of Earth
94–95Elemental Plane of Air
96–97Elemental Plane of Water
98Positive Energy Plane
99Negative Energy Plane
100Demiplane of your choice
The table assumes that the character’s plane of origin is either
the Material Plane, the Astral Plane, the Ethereal Plane, or the
Plane of Shadow. If the character’s plane of origin is instead one of
the planes mentioned on Table 5–7, then substitute the Material
Plane for the plane of origin’s line on the table. For example, break-
ing a staff of power(page 245) on the Elemental Plane of Fire sends
the wielder to the Material Plane if a 91 is rolled.
The layer and exact location of an individual’s arrival on the par-
ticular plane is up to you. Transportation to a random plane does
not guarantee survival there, and individuals who risk such effects
should be aware of the dangers.
PLANE DESCRIPTIONS
The planes that make up the Great Wheel are briefly described
below.
Each of the Transitive Planes and Inner Planes has its own
random encounter table. The Outer Planes share four random
encounter tables; use the appropriate one as directed in the plane’s
description. All the encounter tables in this section are intention-
ally general; if you’re designing a site-based adventure on another
plane, use the appropriate table as a starting point for your own
encounters.
THE ETHEREAL PLANE
The Ethereal Plane is a misty, fog-bound dimension that is coexis-
tent with the Material Plane and often other planes as well. Travel-
ers within the Ethereal Plane describe the plane as a collection of
swirling mists and colorful fogs. The Material Plane itself is visible
from the Ethereal Plane, but it appears muted and indistinct, its
colors blurring into each other and its edges turning fuzzy. Ethe-
real denizens watch the Material Plane as though viewing it
through distorted and frosted glass.
While it is possible to see into the Material Plane from the
Ethereal Plane, the Ethereal Plane is usually invisible to those on
the Material Plane. Normally, creatures on the Ethereal Plane
cannot attack creatures on the Material Plane, and vice versa. A
traveler on the Ethereal Plane is invisible, incorporeal, and
utterly silent to someone on the Material Plane. This makes the
Ethereal Plane very useful for reconnaissance, spying on oppo-
nents, and other occasions when it’s handy to move around with-
out being detected.
The Ethereal Plane is mostly empty of structures and impedi-
ments. However, the plane has its own inhabitants. Some of these
are other ethereal travelers, but the ghosts found here pose a par-
ticular peril to those who walk the fog.
It has the following traits.
•No gravity.
•Alterable morphic. The plane contains little to alter, however.
•Mildly neutral-aligned.
•Normal magic. Spells function normally on the Ethereal Plane,
though they do not cross into the Material Plane. It is possible
for a caster on the Ethereal Plane to use a fireballspell against an
enemy  on  the  Ethereal  Plane,  but  the  same  fireballwouldn’t
affect anyone on the corresponding part of the Material Plane.
A bystander on the Material Plane can walk through an ethereal
battlefield without feeling more than the hair on the back of his
neck standing up.
The only exceptions are spells and spell-like abilities that have the
force descriptor, such as magic missileand wall of force, and abjura-
tion spells that affect ethereal beings. Spellcasters on the Material
Plane must have some way to detect foes on the Ethereal Plane
before targeting them with force-based spells, of course. While it’s
possible to hit ethereal enemies with a magic missilespell cast on
the Material Plane, the reverse isn’t possible. No magical attacks
cross from the Ethereal Plane to the Material Plane, including
force attacks.
151
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS