reating adventures is one of the great benefits of being a
Dungeon Master. It’s a way to express yourself creatively,
designing fantastic places and events filled with monsters
and imaginative elements of all kinds. When you design
an adventure, you call the shots. You do things exactly the
way you want to. Designing an adventure can be a lot of work, but
the rewards are great. Your players will thrill at the challenges and
mysteries you have created for them. Experienced DMs pride
themselves on masterful adventures, creative new situations and
locales, and intriguing NPCs. A well-honed encounter—whether
it’s a monster, a trap, or an NPC who must be reasoned with—can
be a thing of beauty.
“What is an adventure?” isn’t as easy a question to answer as you
might think. While a campaign is made up of adventures, it’s not
always clear where one adventure ends and another begins.
Adventures can be so varied that it’s tough to pin down the basics.
This chapter is going to try to help you do that.
An adventure starts with some sort of hook, whether it’s a
rumor of treasure in an old, abandoned monastery or a plea for
help from the queen. The hook is what draws the PCs into the
action and gets them to the point where the story of the adven-
ture truly begins. This point might be a location (such as the mon-
astery or the queen’s palace) or an event (the theft of the queen’s
scepter, which the PCs are tasked with recovering).
Adventures are broken down into encounters. Encounters are
typically keyed to areas on a map that you have prepared.
Encounters can also be designed in the form of if/then state-
ments: “If the PCs wait outside the druid’s grove for more than an
hour, then his three trained dire bears attack.” The encounters of
an adventure are all linked in some way, whether in theme (all
the encounters that occur as they travel from the City of Grey-
hawk to the Crystalmist Mountains), location (all the
encounters in the ruins of Castle Temerity), or events (all
the encounters that occur as the PCs attempt to rescue the
mayor’s son from Rahurg the ogre king).
MOTIVATION
Motivation is what drives the adventure—it’s what gets
the PCs involved in whatever you have designed for them
to do. If the PCs aren’t motivated, they won’t do what you
want them to, and all your work will be wasted. Greed,
fear, revenge, need, morality, anger, and curiosity are all
powerful motivators. So, of course, is fun. Never forget
that last one.
Writing an adventure with strong motivation is
really a matter of knowing what style of game you and
your players prefer (see page 7 for a discussion of dif-
ferent playing styles).
TAILORED OR STATUS QUO
Tailored motivations are ones that you have specifi-
cally designed with your group’s PCs in mind. Here
are just a few of many possible examples.
•The PCs are a hardened group of mercenaries, not
interested in the pleas of innocents or the stories
of   evil   that   threatens   some   good   kingdom.
However, they are quite interested in gold. . . .
•Mialee the wizard has been slain by the gargoyles in the
Caverns of Dread. Now the other PCs seek a means
to raise her. They know of a good-hearted cleric of
Pelor  to  the  south,  in  the  city  of  Dyvers.  When
43
Illus. by  A. Swekel