than her level. At that moment and thereafter, the bracers cause a
–5 penalty to AC. Once their curse is activated, bracers of defenseless-
nesscan be removed only by means of a remove cursespell.
Moderate conjuration; CL 16th; Create Wondrous Item,mage
armor, bestow curse; Price 1,200 gp.
Broom of Animated Attack:This item is indistinguishable in
appearance from a normal broom. It is identical to a broom of flying
by all tests short of attempted use. Using it reveals that a broom of
animated attackis a very nasty item.
If a command (“Fly,” “Go,” “Giddy-up,” or some similar word) is
spoken, the broom does a loop-the-loop with its hopeful rider,
dumping him on his head from 1d4+5 feet off the ground (no
falling damage, since the fall is less than 10 feet). The broom then
attacks the victim, swatting the face with the straw or twig end
and beating him with the handle end.
The broom gets two attacks per round with each end (two swats
with the straw and two with the handle, for a total of four attacks
per round). It attacks with a +5 bonus on each attack roll. The
straw end causes a victim to be blinded for 1 round when it hits.
The handle deals 1d6 points of damage when it hits. The broom
has AC 13, 18 hit points, and hardness 4.
Moderate transmutation; CL 10th; Create Wondrous Item, fly,
animate objects; Price 5,200 gp.
Cloak of Poisonousness:This cloak is usually made of a
woolen material, although it can be made of leather. A detect poison
spell can reveal the presence of poison impregnated in the cloak’s
fabric. The garment can be handled without harm, but as soon as it
is actually donned the wearer is killed instantly unless she suc-
ceeds on a DC 28 Fortitude save. 
Once donned, a cloak of poisonousnesscan be removed only with
a remove cursespell; doing this destroys the magical property of the
cloak. If a neutralize poisonspell is then used, it is possible to revive
the victim with a raise deador resurrectionspell, but not before.
Strong abjuration; CL 15th; Create Wondrous Item, poison, and
limited wish ormiracle; Price 62,000 gp.
Crystal Hypnosis Ball:This cursed item is indistinguishable
from a normal crystal ball.However, anyone attempting to use the
scrying device becomes fascinated for 1d6 minutes, and a tele-
pathic suggestionis implanted in his mind (Will DC 19 negates).
The user of the device believes that the desired creature or scene
was viewed, but actually he came under the influence of a powerful
wizard, lich, or even some power or being from another plane. (The
DM should choose the controller to fit his or her campaign.) Each
further use brings the crystal hypnosis ballgazer deeper under the
influence of the controller, either as a servant or a tool. The DM
decides whether to make this a gradual or sudden affair, according
to the surroundings and circumstances peculiar to the finding of
the crystal hypnosis balland the character locating it. Note that
throughout this time, the user remains unaware of his subjugation.
Moderate divination; CL 17th; In effect, this is a minor artifact
and cannot be created; Price n/a.
Dust of Sneezing and Choking:This fine dust appears to be
dust of appearance.If cast into the air, it causes those within a 20-
foot spread to fall into fits of sneezing and coughing. Those failing
a DC 15 Fortitude save take 2d6 points of Constitution damage
immediately. In addition, those failing a second DC 15 Fortitude
save 1 minute later are dealt 1d6 points of Constitution damage.
Those who succeed on either saving throw are nonetheless dis-
abled by choking (treat as stunned) for 5d4 rounds.
Faint conjuration; CL 7th; Create Wondrous Item, poison; Price
2,400 gp.
Flask of Curses:This item looks like an ordinary beaker,
bottle, container, decanter, flask, or jug. It may contain a liquid, or
it may emit smoke. When the flask is first unstoppered, all within
30 feet must make a DC 17 Will save or be cursed, taking a –2
penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, and skill checks until a
remove curse spell is cast upon them.
Moderate conjuration; CL 7th; Create Wondrous Item,bestow
curse; Price 2,100 gp.
Gauntlets of Fumbling:These gauntlets may be of supple
leather or heavy protective material suitable for use with armor
(ring, scale, chain, and so on). In the former instance, they appear
to be gloves of Dexterity.In the latter case, they appear to be gauntlets
of ogre power.The gauntlets perform according to every test as if
they were gloves of Dexterityor gauntlets of ogre poweruntil the wearer
finds herself under attack or in a life-and-death situation. At that
time, the curse is activated. The wearer becomes fumble-fingered,
with a 50% chance each round of dropping anything held in either
hand. The gauntlets also lower Dexterity by 2 points. Once the
curse is activated, the gloves can be removed only by means of a
remove cursespell, a wish,or a miracle.
Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Create Wondrous Item,bestow
curse; Price 1,300 gp.
Helm of Opposite Alignment:This metal hat looks like a typ-
ical helmet. When placed upon the head, however, its curse imme-
diately takes effect (Will DC 15 negates). On a failed save, the
alignment of the wearer is radically altered to an alignment as dif-
ferent as possible from the former alignment—good to evil,
chaotic to lawful, neutral to some extreme commitment (LE, LG,
CE, or CG). Alteration in alignment is mental as well as moral, and
the individual changed by the magic thoroughly enjoys his new
outlook. A character who succeeds on his save can continue to
wear the helmet without suffering the effect of the curse, but if he
takes it off and later puts it on again, another save is required. The
curse only works once; that is, a character whose alignment has
been changed cannot change it again by donning the helmet a
second time.
Only  a  wishor a miraclecan restore former alignment, and the
affected individual does not make any attempt to return to the for-
mer alignment. (In fact, he views the prospect with horror and
avoids it in any way possible.) If a character of a class with an align-
ment requirement is affected, an atonement spell is needed as well
if the curse is to be obliterated. When a helm of opposite alignment
has functioned once, it loses its magical properties.
Strong transmutation; CL 12th; Create Wondrous Item, creator
must be 12th level; Price 4,000 gp; Weight 3 lb.
Incense of Obsession:These blocks of incense appear to be
incense of meditation.If meditation and prayer are conducted while
incense of obsessionis burning nearby, its odor and smoke cause the
user to become totally confident that her spell ability is superior,
due to the magic incense. The user is determined to use her spells
at every opportunity, even when not needed or when useless. The
user remains obsessed with her abilities and spells until all have
been used or cast, or until 24 hours have elapsed.
Moderate enchantment; CL 6th; Create Wondrous Item,bestow
curse; Price 200 gp.
Mace of Blood: This +3 heavy macemust be coated in blood
every day, or its bonus fades away (until the mace is coated again).
The character using this mace must make a DC 13 Will save every
day it is within his possession or become chaotic evil.
Moderate abjuration; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cre-
ator must be at least 9th level and chaotic evil; Price 16,000 gp.
Medallion of Thought Projection:This device seems like a
medallion of thoughts, even down to the range at which it functions,
except that the thoughts overheard are muffled and distorted, re-
quiring a DC 15 Will save to sort out. However, while the user
thinks she is picking up the thoughts of others, all she is really
hearing are figments created by the medallion itself. These illu-
sory thoughts always seem plausible and thus can seriously mis-
lead any who rely upon them. What’s worse, unknown to her, the
cursed medallion actually broadcasts her thoughts to creatures in
the path of the beam, thus alerting them to her presence.
Faint divination; CL 7th; Create Wondrous Item,detect thoughts,
ghost sound; Price 1,800 gp.
275
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS