Dungeon Master's Guide v.3.5 Errata 3/10/04 Version 032004 
Hardness and Hit Points 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 222 
Problem: The first paragraph is not consistent with similar 
information for shields on page 217. 
Solution: Delete the first sentence after the boldface header. 
Change the next sentence to read as follows: 
Each +1 of enhancement bonus adds 2 to a weapon’s or 
shield’s hardness and +10 to its hit points. 
Vorpal Weapons 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 223 
Problem: Note 2 under Table 7–14 says that a vorpal 
weapon must be a piercing or slashing weapon. The 
description of vorpal on page 226 says the ability can be 
applied only to a slashing weapon. 
Solution: Fix the table. Change the superscript number on 
Vorpal to 4. Add a new note 4: “Slashing weapons only. 
Reroll if randomly generated for a piercing or bludgeoning 
weapon.” Also, renumber current note 4 to be note 5. 
Staff of Life 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 244 
Problem: The prerequisite spells don’t synch up with the 
staff’s powers. 
Solution: Change raise dead to resurrection; change CL 
11th to CL 13th. 
Table 7–27 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 247 
Problem: The price given for a necklace of fireballs type V is 
in error. 
Solution: Change 6,150 gp to 5,850 gp (to match the item 
description). 
Table 7–28 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 249 
Problem: The price given for a necklace of fireballs type VII 
is in error. 
Solution: Change 9,150 gp to 8,700 gp (to match the item 
description). 
Clay Golem Manual 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 258 
Problem: The Clay golem manual prerequisite spells don’t 
match the Monster Manual info on constructing a clay golem. 
Solution: Delete references to the prayer spell from the clay 
golem manual description. 
Stone Golem Manual 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 258 
Problem: Prerequisite spells for constructing a stone golem 
or greater stone golem given on page 137 of the Monster 
Manual don’t match those given for the stone golem manual 
and greater stone golem manual on page 258 of the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide. 
Solution: The Dungeon Master’s Guide is correct. Add the 
slow spell to the prerequisites for each of these golems in the 
Monster Manual. 
Table 7–33 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 285 
Problem: The “Multiple different abilities” line is in error. 
Solution: Change “Multiply higher item cost by 2” to 
“Multiply lower item cost by 1.5” 
Table 8–1 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 290 
Problem: The table indicates that supernatural abilities can 
be dispelled. This is not true in v.3.5. 
Solution: In the Dispel row, Supernatural column, change 
Yes to No. 
Polymorph 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 297 
Problem: The description of the polymorph effect does not 
account for changes to that spell. 
Solution: Delete the paragraph beginning “Creatures that 
polymorph themselves with an ability . . .” 
Also, replace the last three paragraphs with the following 
text: 
Unless stated otherwise, creatures can polymorph into forms 
of the same type or into an aberration, animal, dragon, fey, 
giant, humanoid, magical beast, monstrous humanoid, ooze, 
plant, or vermin form. Most spells and abilities that grant the 
ability to polymorph place a cap on the Hit Dice of the form 
taken. 
Polymorphed creatures gain the Strength, Dexterity, and 
Constitution of their new forms, as well as size, extraordinary 
special attacks, movement capabilities (to a maximum of 120 
feet for flying and 60 for nonflying movement), natural 
armor bonus, natural weapons, racial skill bonuses, and other 
gross physical qualities such as appearance and number of 
limbs. They retain their original class and level, Intelligence, 
Wisdom, Charisma, hit points, base attack bonus, base save 
bonuses, and alignment. 
Creatures who polymorph keep their worn or held equipment 
if the new form is capable of wearing or holding it. 
Otherwise, it melds with the new form and ceases to function 
for the duration of the polymorph. 
Slow Suffocation 
Dungeon Master’s Guide, page 304 
Problem: This system needs to tie back into the general rules 
for suffocation. As it stands, no one will ever die from slow 
suffocation (because nonlethal damage doesn’t kill). 
Solution: Insert this sentence at the end of the paragraph that 
starts with the Slow Suffocation header: 
When a character falls unconscious from this nonlethal 
damage, she drops to –1 hit points and is dying. In the next 
round, she suffocates.