Reflex save. Creatures not struck but within the spread ignore the
impact damage and take only half damage from the fire spread on a
successful DC 13 Reflex save. Range is 70 feet, at the end of which
the shooting starexplodes, unless it strikes a creature or object before
that. A shooting staralways follows a straight line, and any creature in
its path must make a save or be hit by the projectile.
Indoors at night, or underground, the ring of shooting starshas
the following properties.
•Faerie fire(twice per day)
•Spark shower(special, once per day)
The spark showeris a flying cloud of sizzling purple sparks that
fan out from the ring for a distance of 20 feet in an arc 10 feet wide.
Creatures within this area take 2d8 points of damage each if not
wearing metal armor or carrying a metal weapon. Those wearing
metal armor and/or carrying a metal weapon take 4d8 points of
damage.
Strong evocation; CL 12th; Forge Ring, light, faerie fire, fireball,
lightning bolt; Price 50,000 gp.
Spell Storing, Minor:A minor ring of spell storing contains up to
three levels of spells that the wearer can cast. Each spell has a caster
level equal to the minimum level needed to cast that spell. The
user need not provide any material components or focus, or
pay an XP cost to cast the spell, and there is no arcane spell
failure chance for wearing armor (because the ring
wearer need not gesture). The activation time for the
ring is same as the casting time for the relevant spell,
with a minimum of 1 standard action.
For a randomly generated ring, treat it as a
scroll to determine what spells are stored in it
(see the Scrolls section later in this chapter). If
you roll a spell that would put the ring over the
three-level limit, ignore that roll; the ring has no
more spells in it. (Not every newly discovered ring
need be fully charged.)
A spellcaster can cast any spells into the ring, so long as
the total spell levels do not add up to more than three. Meta-
magic versions of spells take up storage space equal to their spell
level modified by the metamagic feat. A spellcaster
can use a scroll to put a spell into the minor ring of
spell storing.
A wizard could cast two magic missile spells and a mage armor
spell into the ring (1 + 1 + 1 = 3). She could then give the ring to a
druid, who casts the mage armor spell from the ring and then puts
a calm animal spell into the ring. The druid could give the ring to a
barbarian, who could use all the spells but could not replace any.
The ring magically imparts to the wearer the names of all spells
currently stored within it.
Faint evocation; CL 5th; Forge Ring, imbue with spell ability;
Price 18,000 gp.
Spell Storing:As the minor ring of spell storing, except it holds
up to five levels of spells.
Moderate evocation; CL 9th; Forge Ring, imbue with spell ability;
Price 50,000 gp.
Spell Storing, Major:As the minor ring of spell storing, except it
holds up to ten levels of spells.
Strong evocation; CL 17th; Forge Ring, imbue with spell ability;
Price 200,000 gp.
Spell Turning: Up to three times per day on command, this
simple platinum band automatically reflects the next nine levels
of spells cast at the wearer, exactly as if spell turning had been cast
upon the wearer.
Strong abjuration; CL 13th; Forge Ring, spell turning; Price
98,280 gp.
Sustenance: This ring continually provides its wearer with
life-sustaining nourishment. The ring also refreshes the body and
mind, so that its wearer needs only sleep 2 hours per day to gain
the benefit of 8 hours of sleep. The ring must be worn for a full
week before it begins to work. If it is removed, the owner must
wear it for another week to reattune it to himself.
Faint conjuration; CL 5th; Forge Ring, create food and water; Price
2,500 gp.
Swimming: This silver ring has a wave pattern etched into the
band. It continually grants the wearer a +5 competence bonus on
Swim checks.
Faint transmutation; CL 2nd; Forge Ring, creator must have 5
ranks in the Swim skill; Price 2,500 gp. 
Swimming, Improved:As swimming, except it grants a +10
competence bonus on its wearer’s Swim checks. 
Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Forge Ring, creator must have
10 ranks in the Swim skill; Price 10,000 gp.
Telekinesis: This ring allows the caster to use the spell telekine-
sison command.
Moderate transmutation; CL 9th; Forge Ring, telekinesis; Price
75,000 gp.
Three Wishes: This ring is set with three rubies. Each ruby
stores a wishspell, activated by the ring. When a wish
is used, that ruby disappears. For a randomly gen-
erated ring, roll 1d3 to determine the remaining
number of rubies. When all the wishesare used,
the ring becomes a nonmagical item.
Strong evocation (if miracleis used); CL 20th;
Forge Ring, wish ormiracle; Price 97,950 gp; Cost
11,475 gp + 15,918 XP.
Water Walking: This ring, set with an opal,
allows the wearer to continually utilize the effects of
the spell water walk.
Moderate transmutation; CL 9th; Forge Ring,
water walk; Price 15,000 gp.
Wizardry: This special ring comes in four kinds (ring
of wizardry I, ring of wizardry II, ring of wizardry III,and ring of wiz-
ardry IV), all of them useful only to arcane spellcasters. The
wearer’s arcane spells per day are doubled for one specific spell
level. A ring of wizardry Idoubles 1st-level spells, a ring of wizardry
IIdoubles 2nd-level spells, a ring of wizardry IIIdoubles 3rd-level
spells, and a ring of wizardry IVdoubles 4th-level spells. Bonus spells
from high ability scores or school specialization are not doubled.
Moderate (wizardry I) or strong (wizardry II–IV) (no school); CL
11th (I), 14th (II), 17th (III), 20th (IV); Forge Ring, limited wish;
Price 20,000 gp (I), 40,000 gp (II), 70,000 gp (III), 100,000 gp (IV).
X-Ray Vision:On command, this ring gives its possessor the
ability to see into and through solid matter. Vision range is 20 feet,
with the viewer seeing as if he were looking at something in
normal light even if there is no illumination. (For example, if the
wearer looks into a locked chest, he can see inside even if there’s
no light within.) X-ray vision can penetrate 1 foot of stone, 1 inch
of common metal, or up to 3 feet of wood or dirt. Thicker sub-
stances or a thin sheet of lead blocks the vision.
Using the ring is physically exhausting, causing the wearer 1
point of Constitution damage per minute after the first 10 min-
utes of use in a single day.
Moderate divination; CL 6th; Forge Ring, true seeing;Price
25,000 gp.
RODS
Rods are scepterlike devices that have unique magical powers and
do not usually have charges. Anyone can use a rod.
Physical Description:Rods weigh approximately 5 pounds.
They range from 2 feet to 3 feet long and are usually made of iron
or some other metal. (Many, as noted in their descriptions, can
function as light maces or clubs due to their sturdy construction.)
These sturdy items have AC 9, 10 hit points, hardness 10, and a
break DC of 27.
Activation:Details relating to rod use vary from item to item.
See the individual descriptions for specifics.
233
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Ring of 
three wishes