Spectres, wraiths, and a few other creatures lack physical
bodies. Such creatures are insubstantial and can’t be touched by
nonmagical matter or energy. Likewise, they cannot manipulate
objects or exert physical force on objects. However, incorporeal
beings have a tangible presence that sometimes seems like a phys-
ical attack (such as the touch of a spectre) against a corporeal crea-
ture. Incorporeal creatures are present on the same plane as the
characters, and characters have some chance to affect them.
Incorporeal creatures can be harmed only by other incorporeal
creatures, by magic weapons, or by spells, spell-like effects, or
supernatural effects. They are immune to all nonmagical attack
forms. They are not burned by normal fires, affected by natural
cold, or harmed by mundane acids.
Even when struck by magic or magic weapons, an incorporeal
creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal
source—except for a force effect, such as magic missile,or damage
dealt by a ghost touch weapon.
Incorporeal creatures are immune to critical hits, extra damage
from being favored enemies, and from sneak attacks. They move
in any direction (including up or down) at will. They do not need
to walk on the ground. They can pass through solid objects at will,
although they cannot see when their eyes are within solid matter.
Incorporeal creatures hiding inside solid objects get a +2 cir-
cumstance bonus on Listen checks, because solid objects carry
sound well. Pinpointing an opponent from inside a solid object
uses the same rules as pinpointing invisible opponents (see Invis-
ibility, below).
Incorporeal creatures are inaudible unless they decide to make
noise.
The physical attacks of incorporeal creatures ignore material
armor, even magic armor, unless it is made of force (such as mage
armor or bracers of armor) or has the ghost touch ability.
Incorporeal creatures pass through and operate in water as
easily as they do in air.
Incorporeal creatures cannot fall or take falling damage.
Corporeal creatures cannot trip or grapple incorporeal crea-
tures.
Incorporeal creatures have no weight and do not set off traps
that are triggered by weight.
Incorporeal creatures do not leave footprints, have no scent,
and make no noise unless they manifest, and even then they only
make noise intentionally.
INVISIBILITY
An invisible quasit is spying on the adventurers when Lidda gets a
strange feeling. “ There’s something here,” she whispers, and sig-
nals for silence as she tries to locate it by ear.
The ability to move about unseen is wonderful, but it’s not fool-
proof. While they can’t be seen, invisible creatures can be heard,
smelled, or felt.
Invisibility makes a creature undetectable by vision, including
darkvision.
Invisibility does not, by itself, make a creature immune to criti-
cal hits, but it does make the creature immune to extra damage
from being a ranger’s favored enemy and from sneak attacks.
A creature can generally notice the presence of an active invis-
ible creature within 30 feet with a DC 20 Spot check. The observer
gains a hunch that “something’s there” but can’t see it or target it
accurately with an attack. A creature who is holding still is very
hard to notice (DC 30). An inanimate object, an unliving creature
holding still, or a completely immobile creature is even harder to
spot (DC 40). It’s practically impossible (+20 DC) to pinpoint an
invisible creature’s location with a Spot check, and even if a char-
acter succeeds on such a check, the invisible creature still benefits
from total concealment (50% miss chance).
A creature can use hearing to find an invisible creature. A
character can make a Listen check for this purpose as a free
action each round. A Listen check result at least equal to the
invisible creature’s Move Silently check result reveals its pres-
ence. (A creature with no ranks in Move Silently makes a Move
Silently check as a Dexterity check to which an armor check
penalty applies.) A successful check lets a character hear an
invisible creature “over there somewhere.” It’s practically impos-
sible to pinpoint the location of an invisible creature. A Listen
check that beats the DC by 20 pinpoints the invisible creature’s
location.
Listen Check DCs to Detect Invisible Creatures
Invisible Creature Is . . .DC
In combat or speaking0
Moving at half speedMove Silently check result
Moving at full speedMove Silently check result –4
Running or chargingMove Silently check result –20
Some distance away+1 per 10 feet
Behind an obstacle (door)+5
Behind an obstacle (stone wall)+15
A creature can grope about to find an invisible creature. A charac-
ter can make a touch attack with his hands or a weapon into two
adjacent 5-foot squares using a standard action. If an invisible
target is in the designated area, there is a 50% miss chance on the
touch attack. If successful, the groping character deals no damage
but has successfully pinpointed the invisible creature’s current
location. (If the invisible creature moves, its location, obviously, is
once again unknown.)
If an invisible creature strikes a character, the character struck
still knows the location of the creature that struck him (until, of
course, the invisible creature moves). The only exception is if the
invisible creature has a reach greater than 5 feet. In this case, the
struck character knows the general location of the creature but
has not pinpointed the exact location.
If a character tries to attack an invisible creature whose loca-
tion he has pinpointed, he attacks normally, but the invisible
creature still benefits from full concealment (and thus a 50%
miss chance). At your option, a particularly large and slow crea-
ture might get a smaller miss chance. If a wizard projects a disin-
tegrateray into the center of an invisible Huge black pudding,
you could reduce or ignore the miss chance; it’s pretty hard to
miss something that big.
If a character tries to attack an invisible creature whose loca-
tion he has not pinpointed, have the player choose the space
where the character will direct the attack. If the invisible crea-
ture is there, conduct the attack normally. If the enemy’s not
there, roll the miss chance as if it were there, don’t let the player
see the result, and tell him that the character has missed. That
way the player doesn’t know whether the attack missed because
the enemy’s not there or because you successfully rolled the miss
chance.
If an invisible character picks up a visible object, the object
remains visible. One could coat an invisible object with flour to at
least keep track of its position (until the flour fell off or blew
away). An invisible creature can pick up a small visible item and
hide it on his person (tucked in a pocket or behind a cloak) and
render it effectively invisible.
Invisible creatures leave tracks. They can be tracked normally.
Footprints in sand, mud, or other soft surfaces can give enemies
clues to an invisible creature’s location.
An invisible creature in the water displaces water, revealing its
location. The invisible creature, however, is still hard to see and
benefits from concealment.
A creature with the scent ability (page 298) can detect an invis-
ible creature as it would a visible one.
A creature with the Blind-Fight feat has a better chance to hit an
invisible creature. Roll the miss chance twice, and he misses only
295
CHAPTER 8:
GLOSSARY