132
Bard: Bards serve as entertainers, either on their own, singing
for their supper, or in troupes. Some bards aspire to be an aristo-
crat’s personal troubadour. Bards occasionally gather in colleges of
learning and entertainment. Well-known, high-level bards often
found bard colleges. These colleges serve as the standard educa-
tional system for a city as well as a kind of guild where bards can
find training and support.
Cleric:Most clerics have an organizational structure built
right into their class. Religions usually have hierarchies, and each
cleric has his place within the structure. Clerics may be assigned
duties by their churches, or they might be free agents. Clerics can
serve in the military of an aristocrat sanctioned by their religion,
or within some autonomous church-based military order estab-
lished for defense. A high-level cleric can hope to one day be the
shepherd of his own congregation and temple, although some
become religious advisors to aristocrats or the leaders of commu-
nities of their own, with the people of the community looking to
the cleric for religious and temporal guidance. Clerics often work
with paladins, and virtually every knightly order has at least one
cleric member.
Druid:Druids are often loners. They cloister themselves deep in
the wilderness in sacred groves or other areas that they have
claimed for themselves, sometimes working with a single ranger or
a group of rangers. Druids sometimes organize themselves in loose
affiliations. On rare occasions, druids sharing a particular focus
may organize themselves as a tight-knit order. Sometimes creatures
such as satyrs, centaurs, or other fey join these groups as well.
All druids are at least nominally members of druidic society,
which spans the globe. The society is so loose, however, that it may
have little influence on a particular druid.
Druids assist and sometimes even lead small, rural communi-
ties that benefit from their wisdom and power.
Fighter:These characters often serve as mercenaries or officers
in the army. The sheriff in a small town might well be a fighter.
Common soldiers and guards are usually warriors (see page 109).
Fighters may be loners or may gather to form martial societies
for training, camaraderie, and employment (as mercenary compa-
nies, bodyguards, and so on). High-level fighters of great renown
typically found such societies. A fighter of common birth can
hope to become an aristocrat’s champion one day, but those with
aspirations to true greatness plan on earning their own grants of
land to become nobility in their own right.
Monk:The tradition of monk training started in distant lands
but now has become common enough that local people can go off
to monasteries and learn the spiritual and martial arts. In large
cities, monks learn their skills in special academies. Monks often
serve the monastery or academy that trained them. Other times,
however, they may join a different monastery or academy. A high-
level monk with a good reputation can even found her own mon-
astery or academy.
Only on rare occasions does a monk find a place in society out-
side her monastery. Such monks can become spiritual advisors,
military commanders, or even law enforcers. A unit of monks in
an army or in the local constabulary would be feared indeed.
Paladin: Paladins are knights, working for their church or
within a knightly order. Qualifying for an order is often difficult,
and membership always requires that the paladin follow a specific
code of conduct. These orders sometimes allow nonpaladins as
members, with good-aligned rangers and fighters being the most
common sort of nonpaladin members.
Paladins can serve in the military force of an aristocrat sanc-
tioned by their religion, or within some autonomous church-
based military order established for defense. A high-level paladin
might seek to rule her own domain (to bestow her just benevo-
lence upon the masses), establish her own temple where none
existed before, or to serve as the trusted lieutenant of a high priest
or worthy aristocrat. Paladins in such service are often called justi-
ciars or something similar, implying that the paladin is in charge
of dispensing church-sanctioned justice.
Ranger:Rangers often seclude themselves, wandering into the
wilderness for long stretches of time. If they aspire to leadership,
it is often as the warden of a small frontier community. Some
rangers form loose-knit and often secretive organizations. These
ranger groups watch over events in the land, and their members
gather to exchange information. They often have the best view of
the grand picture of everything that occurs. High-level rangers
aspire to found their own ranger societies or to establish and rule
new communities, often those they have carved out of the wilder-
ness itself.
Rangers and druids often work together, even sharing the same
secretive network. Sometimes a ranger group includes a few
druids, or vice versa.
Rogue: Rogues may serve in armies as spies or scouts. They can
work as operatives of temples or as general troubleshooters for
aristocrats, having attained these unique positions because of the
versatility of their skills and abilities.
Frequently,  however,  rogues  gather  together  in  guilds
devoted to their area of expertise: theft. Thieves’ guilds are
common. The larger a city is, the more likely it is to have a
thieves’ guild. The populace and the constabulary sometimes
hate these guilds. At other times they are tolerated or even
accepted, so long as they don’t allow themselves to get out of
hand in their work. Acceptance is often gained through bribery
in politically corrupt areas.
Sorcerer:To the general populace, sorcerers are indistinguish-
able from wizards. They often fill the same roles as wizards in
society, although they rarely join wizards’ guilds, since they have
no need to research and study. Sorcerers, more than wizards, keep
to themselves. Sorcerers are more likely to hang about the fringes
of society, among creatures that other people would consider
monsters.
Conversely, some sorcerers find that military life suits them
even better than wizards. Sorcerers focused on battle spells are
more deadly than wizards, and they often are better with weapons.
A high-level sorcerer might aspire to the same sorts of goals a
wizard  would.  Despite  their  similarities,  their  differing
approaches means wizards and sorcerers find themselves in con-
flict more often than they get along.
Wizard:Wizards can serve many roles in society. Wizards for
hire are useful to the military as firepower (some armies employ
entire units of wizards to blast the enemy, protect troops from
danger, tear down castle walls, and so on). Or a wizard can serve
the community as a well-paid troubleshooter—someone able to
rid the town of vermin, stop the levee from bursting, or foretell
the future. A wizard can open a shop and sell magic items she cre-
ates or cast needed spells for a fee. She can aspire to serve an aris-
tocrat as an advisor and chief wizard, or to even rule over a com-
munity on her own. Sometimes, the public fears a wizard for her
power, but more often than not the local wizard is a highly
respected member of the community.
Wizards sometimes gather in guilds, societies, or cabals for
mutual research, and to live among those who understand the
endless fascination of magic. Only the most powerful and famous
of wizards have the reputations necessary to found permanent
establishments, such as a wizard’s school. Where they exist, wiz-
ards’ guilds control such issues as the price and availability of
spells and magic items in a community.
GUILDS AND ORGANIZATIONS
As mentioned in many of the preceding descriptions, characters
often gather in groups with characters of the same class. Some-
times this is simply the best way to keep one’s place in society and
to make friends with common interests. Sometimes it’s required
by law or outside pressure. For example, if you’re a wizard in the
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS