134
OTHER CAMPAIGN ISSUES
Other factors in dealing with campaigns include introducing new
players to an ongoing campaign, fostering player goals, changing
alignments, managing the transition of PCs from low to high
levels, and coping with increasing character power.
INTRODUCING NEW PLAYERS
Players come and go. When a new player joins the group, take the
average of the levels of the existing PCs and allow the new player
to create a character of that level. The only exception to this guide-
line is when the new player is completely unfamiliar with the
D&D game. In that case, it’s easiest for that player to start with a
1st-level character.
Working a new character into the group is similar to establish-
ing why the group got together in the first place, but can be more
difficult if the party is in the middle of an adventure. A few possi-
bilities are given below.
•The new PC is a friend or relative of one of the existing PCs and
finally caught up with the group to join in.
•The new PC is a prisoner of the foes the existing PCs are fight-
ing. When they rescue him, he joins their group.
•The new PC was a part of another adventuring group that was
wiped out except for her.
•The new  PC  was  sent  to  the  site  for  reasons  unrelated  to  the
party’s adventure (which might lead later to another adventure
that  the  new  PC  can  initiate)  and  joins  with  the  existing  PCs
because there’s strength in numbers.
FOSTERING PLAYER GOALS
Players should eventually develop goals for their characters. Goals
might include joining a particular guild, starting their own
church, building a fortress, starting a business, obtaining a partic-
ular magic item, getting powerful enough to defeat the enemies
threatening their hometown, finding a lost brother, or tracking
down the villain who escaped them long ago. You should not only
encourage goals for characters, but you should be willing to
design adventures based around them. Goals shouldn’t be easy to
attain, but a player should always at least have the opportunity to
realize the goals he developed for his character (assuming they are
at all realistic).
CHANGING ALIGNMENT
A character can have a change of heart that leads to the adoption
of a different alignment. Alignments aren’t commitments, except
in specific cases (such as for paladins and clerics). Player charac-
ters have free will, and their actions often dictate a change of
alignment. Here are two examples of how a change of alignment
can be handled.
•A player  creates  a  new  character,  a  rogue  named  Garrett.  The
player  decides  he  wants  Garrett  to  be  neutral  good  and  writes
that on Garrett’s character sheet. By the second playing session
of Garrett’s career, however, it’s clear that the player isn’t playing
Garrett  as  a  good-aligned  character  at  all.  Garrett  likes  to  steal
minor valuables from others (although not his friends) and does
not  care  about  helping  people  or  stopping  evil.  Garrett  is  a
neutral character, and the player made a mistake when declaring
Garrett’s alignment because he hadn’t yet really decided how he
wanted to play him. The DM tells the player to erase “good” on
Garrett’s character sheet, making his alignment simply “neutral.”
No big deal.
•An NPC traveling with the PCs is chaotic evil and is pretending
to  be  otherwise  because  he  was  sent  to  spy  on  them  and  foil
their plans. He has been evil all his life, and he has lived among
others  who  acted  as  he  did.  As  he  fights  alongside  the  good-
aligned  PC  adventurers,  however,  he  sees  how  they  work
together  and  help  each  other.  He  begins  to  envy  them  their
camaraderie. Finally, he watches as the paladin PC gives his life
to save not only his friends, but an entire town that was poised
on  the  brink  of  destruction  at  the  hands  of  an  evil  sorcerer.
Everyone  is  deeply  moved,  including  the  evil  NPC,  and  the
town  celebrates  and  honors  the  paladin’s  self-sacrifice.  The
townfolk hail the adventurers as heroes. The NPC is so moved
that  he  repents,  casting  aside  his  own  evil  ways  (and  his
mission). He becomes chaotic neutral, but he is well on his way
to  becoming  chaotic  good,  particularly  if  he  remains  in  the
company  of  the  PCs.  If  the  PCs  had  not  acted  so  gallantly,  he
might  not  have  changed  his  ways.  If  they  turn  on  the  NPC
when they learn of his past, he may turn back to evil.
Most characters incur no game penalty for changing alignment,
but you should keep a few points in mind.
Yo u’r e  in Control:You control alignment changes, not the
players. If a player says, “My neutral good character becomes
chaotic good,” the appropriate response from you is “Prove it.”
Actions dictate alignment, not statements of intent by players.
Alignment Change Is Gradual:Changes in alignment should
not be drastic. Usually, a character changes alignment only one
step at a time—from lawful evil to lawful neutral, for example,
and not directly to neutral good. A character on her way to adopt-
ing another alignment might have other alignments during the
transition to the final alignment.
Time Requirements:Changing alignment usually takes time.
Changes of heart are rarely sudden (although they can be). What
you want to avoid is a player changing her character’s alignment to
evil to use an evil artifact properly and then changing it right back
when she’s done. Alignments aren’t garments you can take off and
put on casually. Require an interval of at least a week of game time
between alignment changes.
Indecisiveness Indicates Neutrality:Wishy-washy charac-
ters should just be neutral. If a character changes alignment over
and over again during a campaign, what’s really happened is that
the character hasn’t made a choice, and thus she is neutral.
Exceptions:There are exceptions to all of the above. For in-
stance, it’s possible (although unlikely) that the most horrible neu-
tral evil villain has a sudden and dramatic change of heart and im-
mediately becomes neutral good.
THE TRANSITION 
FROM LOW TO HIGH LEVEL
One of the most rewarding and fun aspects of a campaign, for
players and DMs alike, is the slow but steady transition from 1st
level through the low levels (2nd–5th) to the middle levels
(6th–11th) into the high levels (12th–15th) and finally to the very
high levels (16th–20th). You should be aware that low-level play
and high-level play are very different experiences. At low levels,
it’s difficult to keep the characters alive. At high levels, it’s difficult
to cause them a lot of harm. Although you should be impartial
overall, at low levels make sure that the challenges the PCs face
aren’t far too tough for them. There’s plenty of time at the higher
levels when you can feel free to take off the kid gloves and throw
whatever you want at them. High-level characters have the power
and resources to survive and overcome just about anything.
Low Level
As characters start out and even after they gain a few levels, the
following points apply.
•Characters  are  fragile.  Save  bonuses,  AC,  and  hit  points  are  all
low.
•Characters can face only a few encounters before resting.
•Characters shouldn’t stray far from civilization.
•Characters can’t count on having a specific capability. Even if a
cleric prepares a certain spell, for example, there’s no guarantee
that he will still have it in his repertoire when he really needs it.
Spell durations are short, and resources are few.
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS