Faint illusion; CL 6th; Craft Wondrous Item, major image; Price
8,100 gp; Weight 1/2 lb.
Dimensional Shackles:These shackles have golden runes
traced across their cold iron surface. Any creature bound within
them is affected as if a dimensional anchorspell were cast upon her
(no save). They fit any Small to Large creature. The DC to break or
slip out of the shackles is 30.
Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Wondrous Item, dimen-
sional anchor; Price 28,000 gp; Weight 5 lb.
Drums of Panic:These drums are kettle drums (hemispheres
about 1-1/2 feet in diameter on stands). They come in pairs and
are unremarkable in appearance. If both of the pair are sounded,
all creatures within 120 feet (with the exception of those within
a 20-foot-radius safe zone around the drums) are affected as by a
fearspell (Will DC 16 partial). Drums of panic can be used once
per day.
Moderate necromancy; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous Item, fear; Price
30,000 gp; Weight 10 lb. for the pair.
Dust of Appearance:This fine powder appears to be a very fine,
very light metallic dust. A single handful of this substance flung
into the air coats objects within a 10-foot radius, making them visi-
ble even if they are invisible. It likewise negates the effects of blur
and displacement.(In this, it works just like the faerie fire spell). The
dust also reveals figments, mirror images, and projected imagesfor
what they are. A creature coated with the dust takes a –30 penalty
on its Hide checks. The dust’s effect lasts for 5 minutes.
Dust of appearanceis typically stored in small silk packets or
hollow bone tubes.
Faint conjuration; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, glitterdust;
Price 1,800 gp.
Dust of Disappearance:This dust looks just like dust of appear-
anceand is typically stored in the same manner. A creature or
object touched by it becomes invisible (as greater invisibility).
Normal vision can’t see dusted creatures or objects, nor can they
be detected by magical means, including see invisibilityor invisibil-
ity purge. Dust of appearance,however, does reveal people and
objects made invisible by dust of disappearance.Other factors, such
as sound and smell, also allow possible detection.
The greater invisibilitybestowed by the dust lasts for 2d6 rounds.
The invisible creature doesn’t know when the duration will end.
Moderate illusion; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous Item, greater invisi-
bility; Price 3,500 gp.
Dust of Dryness:This special dust has many uses. If it is
thrown  into  water,  a  volume  of  as  much  as  100  gallons  is
instantly transformed to nothingness, and the dust becomes a
marble-sized pellet, floating or resting where it was thrown. If
this pellet is hurled down, it breaks and releases the same
volume of water. The dust affects only water (fresh, salt, alka-
line), not other liquids.
If the dust is employed against an elemental with the water sub-
type, the creature must make a DC 18 Fortitude save or be
destroyed. The dust deals 5d6 points of damage to the creature
even if its saving throw succeeds.
Moderate transmutation; CL 11th; Craft Wondrous Item, control
water; Price 850 gp.
Dust of Illusion:This unremarkable powder resembles chalk
dust or powdered graphite. Stare at it, however, and the dust
changes color and form. Put dust of illusionon a creature, and that
creature is affected as if by adisguise selfglamer, with the individual
who sprinkles the dust envisioning the illusion desired. An
unwilling target is allowed a DC 11 Reflex save to avoid the dust.
The glamer lasts for 2 hours.
Faint illusion; CL 6th; Craft Wondrous Item, disguise self; Price
1,200 gp.
Dust of Tracelessness:This normal-seeming dust is actually a
magic powder that can conceal the passage of its possessor and his
companions. Tossing a handful of this dust into the air causes a
chamber of up to 100 square feet of floor space to become as dusty,
dirty, and cobweb-laden as if it had been abandoned and disused
for a decade.
A handful of dust sprinkled along a trail causes evidence of the
passage of as many as a dozen men and horses to be obliterated for
250 feet back into the distance. The results of the dust are instan-
taneous, and no magical aura lingers afterward from this use of the
dust. Survival checks made to track a quarry across an area affected
by this dust have a DC 20 higher than normal.
Faint transmutation; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, pass without
trace; Price 250 gp.
Efreeti Bottle:This item is typically fashioned of brass or
bronze, with a lead stopper bearing special seals. A thin stream of
smoke is often seen issuing from it. The bottle can be opened once
per day. When opened, the efreeti imprisoned within issues from
the bottle instantly. There is a 10% chance (01–10 on d%) that the
efreeti is insane and attacks immediately upon being released.
There is also a 10% chance (91–100) that the efreeti of the bottle
grants three wishes. In either case, the efreeti afterward disappears
forever. The other 80% of the time (11–90), the inhabitant of the
bottle loyally serves the character for up to 10 minutes per day (or
until the efreeti’s death), doing as she commands. (See page 115 of
the Monster Manual for efreeti statistics.) Roll each day the bottle is
opened for that day’s effect.
Strong conjuration; CL 14th; Craft Wondrous Item, summon
monster VII; Price 145,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Elemental Gem:This gem contains a conjuration spell
attuned to a specific Elemental Plane (Air, Earth, Fire, or Water).
When the gem is crushed, smashed, or broken (a standard
action), a Large elemental appears as if summoned by a summon
nature’s allyspell. The elemental is under the control of the crea-
ture that broke the gem.
The coloration of the gem varies with the type of elemental it
summons. Air elemental gemsare transparent, earth elemental gems
are light brown, fire elemental gemsare reddish orange, and water
elemental gemsare blue-green.
Moderate conjuration; CL 11th; Craft Wondrous Item, summon
nature’s ally V;Price 2,250 gp.
Elixir of Fire Breath: This strange elixir bestows upon the
drinker the ability to spit gouts of flame. He can breathe fire up to
three times, each time dealing 4d6 points of fire damage to a single
target up to 25 feet away. The victim can attempt a DC 13 Reflex
save for half damage. Unused blasts dissipate 1 hour after the
liquid is consumed.
Moderate evocation; CL 11th; Craft Wondrous Item, scorching
ray;Price 1,100 gp.
Elixir of Hiding: A character drinking this liquid gains an
intuitive ability to hide (+10 competence bonus on Hide checks
for 1 hour).
Faint illusion; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, invisibility; Price
250 gp.
Elixir of Love:This sweet-tasting liquid causes the character
drinking it to become charmedwith the first creature she sees after
consuming the draft (as charm person—the drinker must be a hu-
manoid of Medium or smaller size, Will DC 14 negates). The
charmeffects wear off in 1d3 hours.
Faint transmutation; CL 4th; Craft Wondrous Item, charm
person; Price 150 gp.
Elixir of Sneaking: This draught of liquid grants the drinker the
ability to walk softly and dampens sound around her slightly, grant-
ing a +10 competence bonus on Move Silently checks for 1 hour.
Faint illusion; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, silence; Price
250 gp.
Elixir of Swimming: This elixir bestows swimming ability. An
almost imperceptible magic sheath surrounds the drinker, allow-
ing him to glide through the water easily (+10 competence bonus
on Swim checks for 1 hour).
255
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS