•Throwing it into the volcano lair of the dragon Uthrax.
•Crushed under the heel of a demigod.
•Buried in the Rift of Corrosion in the Abyss.
•Disintegrated while placed at the base of the Infinite Staircase.
•Devoured by Talos, the triple iron golem.
•Immersed  in  the  Fountain  of  Light  in  the  holy  Halls  of
Heironeous himself.
Because the means of destruction of a major artifact are so diffi-
cult, such an item is often buried in a deep vault, thrown into the
Astral Plane, or placed behind extremely powerful and untiring
guardians by those without the power, knowledge, or wherewithal
to destroy it.
Major Artifact Descriptions
The artifacts presented here are meant to be examples. Artifacts
should be tailored to fit your individual campaign and its history:
The discovery of a major artifact should be a campaign-defining
moment. Feel free to change the powers of the example artifacts
given here in order to customize these artifacts to your campaign.
The Hand and Eye of Vecna:The archlich Vecna may have
been the most powerful wizard ever to have lived. He may also
have been the most evil. Apparently risen now to deityhood, he
left behind relics embodying remnants of his power—the mum-
mified remains of his hand and his eye.
Powers of the Eye:In order to function, the Eye of Vecnamust be
placed in the empty socket of a character’s skull. The bearer of the
Eyeloses 2 points of Charisma, and these points may never be
restored. The Eyemay not thereafter be removed without resulting
in the death of its host. It grants the host continuous darkvisionand
true seeing. Three times per day each, the host can use the spells eye-
bite and domination. Once per day, the bearer of the Eyecan call
forth destruction and unhallow. A nonevil character must make a DC
17 Will save each week to avoid becoming evil. All powers are at
caster level 20th, and all DCs to resist their effects are 20.
Powers of the Hand:In order to function, the Hand of Vecnamust
be placed on the end of a left arm whose original hand has been
severed. The bearer of the Handloses 2 points of Dexterity that
may never be regained. Removal of the hand thereafter always
results in the death of the host. The touch of the Hand,once so
placed, deals 1d10 points of cold damage to a target. Three times
per day, its touch can permanently drain 1 ability score point
(host’s choice of ability) from a victim. The host gains the points
drained for the rest of that day. (They last until the next sunrise.)
Once per day, the bearer of the Handcan call upon blasphemyand
unholy aura. A nonevil character must make a DC 17 Will save
each week to avoid becoming evil. All powers are at caster level
20th, and all DCs to resist their effects are 20.
Powers with Both Artifacts:If a single character bears both the
Hand of Vecnaand the Eye of Vecna,the DC to resist all powers of
both items increases to 25. The host gains +2 to Strength and +2 to
Intelligence but takes a –2 penalty to Wisdom. She can call upon
summon monster IXonce per day (to summon evil outsiders only).
A nonevil character who possesses both items must make a DC 23
Will save each week to avoid becoming evil.
The Mace of Cuthbert:St. Cuthbert, tales say, once walked the
earth as a man. When he did, he used a potent weapon to strike
against the infidels and evil beings he encountered everywhere he
went. Today, this relic appears to be a simple, well-used cudgel, but
its simple appearance hides great power. The Mace of Cuthberthas a
+5 enhancement bonus and functions as a heavy mace with the
holy, lawful, and disruption special abilities. The wielder can proj-
ect searing lightfrom the mace at will, at caster level 20th.
The Moaning Diamond:Said to have been ripped from the
ground in a ritual that tortured the earth itself, the Moaning Dia-
mondappears to be an uncut diamond the size of a human fist. At
all times, it gives forth a baleful moaning sound, as if in pain.
Despite the noise, the Moaning Diamondis not evil (although it
was birthed in torture). The wielder of the stone can, three times
per day, call upon it to reshape earth and stone as if by the spell
stone shape, affecting 5,000 cubic feet of material. The Moaning Dia-
mondcan summon an elder earth elemental with maximum hit
points that serves the caster until it is slain. Only one such ele-
mental can be summoned at a time; if it is slain, a new creature
cannot be summoned for 24 hours. Tales from the past tell of the
Moaning Diamondcreating stone structures, opening under-
ground chambers where there had been none before, and collaps-
ing entire castles.
The Orbs of Dragonkind:These fabled Orbswere created eons
ago in order to master dragons in the great Dragon Wars. Each
contains the essence and personality of an ancient dragon of a dif-
ferent variety (one for each of the major ten different chromatic
and metallic dragons). The bearer of an Orbcan dominate dragons
of its particular variety within 500 feet (as dominate monster), the
dragon being forced to make a DC 25 Will save to resist. (Spell
resistance is not useful against this effect.) EachOrb of Dragonkind
bestows upon the wielder the AC and saving throw bonuses of the
dragon within (see the Monster Manualfor details on each dragon
variety). These values replace whatever values the character would
otherwise have, whether they are better or worse. These values
cannot be modified by any means short of ridding the character of
the Orb.A character possessing an Orb of Dragonkindis immune to
the breath weapon—but only the breath weapon—of the dragon
variety keyed to the Orb.Thus, the possessor of the Red Dragon Orb
of Dragonkindis immune to red dragon breath, but not fire of any
other sort. Finally, a character possessing an Orbcan herself use
the breath weapon of the dragon in the Orbthree times per day
(see the Monster Manual).
All Orbs of Dragonkindcan be used to communicate verbally and
visually with the possessors of the other Orbs.The owner of an Orb
knows whether there are dragons within 10 miles at all times. For
dragons of the Orb’s particular variety, the range is 100 miles. If
within 1 mile of a dragon of the Orb’s variety, the wielder can
determine the exact location and age of the creature. The bearer of
one of these Orbsearns the enmity forever of all dragonkind for
profiting by the enslavement of one of their kin, even if she later
loses the item.
Each Orbalso has an individual power that can be invoked once
per round at 10th caster level.
•Black Dragon Orb: Fly(Will DC 17 negates).
•Blue Dragon Orb: Haste(Fortitude DC 17 negates).
•Brass Dragon Orb: Teleport(Will DC 19 negates).
•Bronze Dragon Orb: Scrying(Will DC 18 negates).
•Copper Dragon Orb: Suggestion(Will DC 17 negates).
•Gold  Dragon  Orb:  The  owner  of  the  gold  Orbcan  call  upon  any
power possessed by one of the other Orbs—including the domi-
nateand  breath  weapon  abilities  but  not  AC,  save  bonuses,  or
breath  weapon  immunity—but  can  only  use  an  individual
power once per day. She can use dominateon any other posses-
sor of an Orbwithin 1 mile (Will DC 23 negates).
•Green Dragon Orb: Spectral hand.
•Red Dragon Orb: Wall of fire.
•Silver Dragon Orb: Cure critical wounds(Will DC 18 half ).
•White Dragon Orb: Protection from energy (cold)(Fortitude DC 17
negates).
The Shadowstaff:This artifact was crafted centuries ago, weav-
ing together the wispy strands of shadow itself into a twisted black
staff. The Shadowstaff makes the wielder slightly shadowy and
incorporeal, granting him a +4 bonus to AC and Reflex saves
(which stacks with any other bonuses). However, in bright light
(such as that of the sun, but not a torch) or in absolute darkness,
the wielder takes a –2 penalty on all attack rolls, saves, and checks.
The Shadowstaffalso has these powers.
•Summon  Shadows:Three  times  per  day  the  staff  may  summon
2d4 shadows (see page 221 of the Monster Manual). Immune to
281
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS