worth 40% of the value of a fully charged wand (with 50 charges).
For an item that has usefulness in addition to its charges, only
part of the item’s value is based on the number of charges left
(DM’s discretion).
Some items, such as arrows, sticks of incense, pinches of magic
dust, and potions, are single-use and expendable. Such items can
often be found in sets or groups. For example, it’s common to
come upon a pouch with more than one handful of dust of disap-
pearance, or a flask with multiple 1-ounce doses of a potion of cure
light wounds. These are priced and weighted in the random tables
as single items, but you can allow more of such items when they
are determined. For example, if three minor magic items are indi-
cated in a treasure hoard and you get incense of meditationon the
first roll, you might decide that all three items are sticks of
incense. Such placement makes for more logical hoards of trea-
sure for adventurers.
MAGIC ITEM DESCRIPTIONS
In the following sections, each general type of magic item, such as
armor or potions, gets an overall description, followed by descrip-
tions of specific items.
General descriptions include notes on activation, random
generation, and other material. The AC, hardness, hit points,
and break DC are given for typical examples of some magic
items. The AC assumes that the item is unattended and includes
a –5 penalty for the item’s effective Dexterity of 0. If a creature
holds the item, use the creature’s Dexterity modifier in place of
the –5 penalty.
Some individual items, notably those that simply store spells
and nothing else, don’t get full-blown descriptions. Reference the
spell’s description in the Player ’s Handbookfor details, modified by
the form of the item (potion, scroll, wand, and so on). Assume that
the spell is cast at the minimum level required to cast it, unless you
choose to make it higher for some reason (which increases the
cost of the item; see Table 7–33: Estimating Magic Item Gold Piece
Values). The main reason to make it higher, of course, would be to
increase the power of the spell. This decision is common for spells
dependent on level, such as fireball, for which damage is every-
thing, or summon monster, in which duration can increase the pow-
er of the spell dramatically.
Items with full descriptions have their powers detailed, and
each of the following topics is covered in notational form at the
end of the description.
•Aura:Most of the time, a detect magicspell will reveal the school
of  magic  associated  with  a  magic  item  and  the  strength  of  the
aura an item emits. This information (when applicable) is given
at the beginning of the item’s notational entry in the form of a
phrase such as “Strong transmutation.” See the detect magicspell
description in the Player ’s Handbookfor details.
•Caster  Level:The  next  item  in  a  notational  entry  gives  the
caster  level  of  the  item,  indicating  its  relative  power  (just  as  a
spell’s  caster  level  measures  its  power).  The  caster  level  deter-
mines  the  item’s  saving  throw  bonus,  as  well  as  range  or  other
level-dependent aspects of the powers of the item (if variable).
It also determines the level that must be contended with should
the item come under the effect of a dispel magicspell or similar
situation.  This  information  is  given  in  the  form  “CL  x,”  where
“CL”  is  an  abbreviation  for  caster  level  and  “x”  is  an  ordinal
number representing the caster level itself.
For potions, scrolls, and wands, the creator can set the caster
level of an item at any number high enough to cast the stored
spell and not higher than her own caster level. For example, at
5th  level,  Mialee  could  scribe  a  scroll  of  invisibilityat  caster
level  3rd  (making  it  last  3  minutes),  caster  level  4th  (4
minutes),  or  caster  level  5th  (5  minutes).  For  other  magic
items, the caster level is determined by the item itself. In this
case,  the  creator’s  caster  level  must  be  as  high  as  the  item’s
caster  level  (and  prerequisites  may  effectively  put  a  higher
minimum on the creator’s level).
•Prerequisites:Certain requirements must be met in order for
a  character  to  create  a  magic  item.  These  include  feats,  spells,
and  miscellaneous  requirements  such  as  level,  alignment,  and
race or kind. The prerequisites for creation of an item are given
immediately following the item’s caster level.
A spell prerequisite may be provided by a character who has
prepared  the  spell  (or  who  knows  the  spell,  in  the  case  of  a
sorcerer or bard), or through the use of a spell completion or
spell  trigger  magic  item  or  a  spell-like  ability  that  produces
the  desired  spell  effect.  For  each  day  that  passes  in  the
creation  process,  the  creator  must  expend  one  spell  comple-
tion item (such as a scroll) or one charge from a spell trigger
item  (such  as  a  wand),  if  either  of  those  objects  is  used  to
supply a prerequisite.
It is  possible  for  more  than  one  character  to  cooperate  in
the creation of an item, with each participant providing one or
more  of  the  prerequisites.  In  some  cases,  cooperation  may
even be necessary, such as if one character knows some of the
spells  necessary  to  create  an  item  and  another  character
knows the rest.
If two  or  more  characters  cooperate  to  create  an  item,  they
must  agree  among  themselves  who  will  be  considered  the
creator  for  the  purpose  of  determinations  where  the  creator’s
level  must  be  known.  (It’s  generally  sensible,  although  not
mandatory,  for  the  highest-level  character  involved  to  be
considered the creator.) The character designated as the creator
pays the XP required to make the item.
Typically, a list of prerequisites includes one feat and one or
more spells (or some other requirement in addition to the feat).
When two spells at the end of a list are separated by “or,” one of
those  spells  is  required  in  addition  to  every  other  spell
mentioned prior to the last two. For example, the prerequisites
for a ring of three wishesare “Forge Ring, wish ormiracle,” mean-
ing  that  either  wishor miracleis  required  as  well  as  the  Forge
Ring feat.
•Market  Price:  This  gold  piece  value,  given  following  the
word  “Price,”  represents  the  price  someone  should  expect  to
pay to buy the item. The market price for an item that can
be constructed  with  an  item  creation  feat  is  usually  equal  to
the  base  price  plus  the  price  for  any  components  (material
or XP).
•Cost to Create: The next part of a notational entry is the cost
in  gp  and  XP  to  create  the  item,  given  following  the  word
“Cost.”  This  information  appears  only  for  items  with  compo-
nents (material or XP), which make their market prices higher
than  their  base  prices.  The  cost  to  create  includes  the  costs
derived  from  the  base  cost  plus  the  costs  of  the  components.
Items  without  components  do  not  have  a  “Cost”  entry.  For
them, the market price and the base price are the same. The cost
in  gp  is  1/2  the  market  price,  and  the  cost  in  XP  is  1/25  the
market price.
•Weight: The  notational  entry  for  many  wondrous  items  ends
with a value for the item’s weight. When a weight figure is not
given,  the  item  has  no  weight  worth  noting  (for  purposes  of
determining how much of a load a character can carry).
MAGIC ITEM NAMES
Spell-storing magic items—primarily potions and wands—have
names that simply reflect the spell stored within them, such as a
wand of fireballor potion of haste. In the game world, these may be
replaced by more sophisticated or evocative names. The straight-
forward names of spell-storing items also distinguish them from
more powerful items with more interesting names such as the staff
of power, the robe of the archmagi, or a holy avengersword.
215
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS