Higher Levels
As characters gain more levels, the following points become in-
creasingly pertinent.
•Characters are very tough. Save bonuses, AC, and hit points are
all high. 
•Characters can survive many encounters before resting. At very
high levels, the need for rest is rarely an issue.
•Characters can provide their own food, their own magic items,
and their own healing. They can even raise each other from the
dead.
•Given time, characters can do almost anything. Even if the wiz-
ard  in  the  group  doesn’t  know  the  disintegratespell,  you  can
place  a  barrier  that  can  only  be  bypassed  by  disintegrateand
count  on  the  party  being  able  to  get  past  it.  (They  can  obtain
access to the spell in some way, or use their other resources to
achieve  the  same  goal.)  At  very  high  levels,  don’t  be  afraid  to
throw just about any challenge in the way of the characters. All
kinds  of  character  actions—movement,  durability,  dealing
damage,  influencing  others,  accumulating  information,  and
adaptation to circumstances and environments—have a higher
chance of success at higher levels.
CHARACTER POWER LEVELS
As the campaign progresses, the PCs get more powerful through
level advancement, the acquisition of money and magic items, and
the establishment of their reputations. You have to carefully
match this advancement with increasing challenges, both in foes
who must be overcome and in the deeds that must be performed.
In addition, however, you need to watch the PCs closely and
make sure that they neither get out of control because of their
increased power nor fail to use what’s put before them. While it’s
up to them to make decisions regarding their characters’ advance-
ment and what they do with their newfound abilities, it’s up to you
to keep control of the campaign, maintain balance (see Keeping
Game Balance, page 13), and keep things running smoothly.
Character Wealth
One of the ways in which you can maintain measurable control on
PC power is by strictly monitoring their wealth, including their
magic items. Table 5–1: Character Wealth by Level is based on
average treasures found in average encounters compared with the
experience points earned in those encounters. Using that infor-
mation, you can determine how much wealth a character should
have based on her level.
The baseline campaign for the D&D game uses this “wealth by
level” guideline as a basis for balance in adventures. No adventure
meant for 7th-level characters, for example, will require or assume
that the party possesses a magic item that costs 20,000 gp.
Table 5–1: Character Wealth by Level
CharacterCharacter
LevelWealthLevelWealth
2nd900 gp12th88,000 gp
3rd2,700 gp13th110,000 gp
4th5,400 gp14th150,000 gp
5th9,000 gp15th200,000 gp
6th13,000 gp16th260,000 gp
7th19,000 gp17th340,000 gp
8th27,000 gp18th440,000 gp
9th36,000 gp19th580,000 gp
10th49,000 gp20th760,000 gp
11th66,000 gp
Player Characters out of Control
Power can get out of hand. Power corrupts. PCs may do things that
show their arrogance, or their contempt for those below them, as
they advance in power. A 10th-level fighter may feel that he no
longer has to treat the duke with respect since he can single-hand-
edly defeat all the duke’s soldiers. A powerful wizard might feel so
unstoppable that she wantonly tosses around fireballsin the
middle of town. While it’s fine for PCs to enjoy their abilities as
they advance in level (that’s the whole point), they shouldn’t be
allowed to do whatever they wish. Even high-level characters
shouldn’t run about completely unchecked.
Players should always remember one fact: There’s always someone
more powerful. You should set up your world with the idea that the
PCs, while special, are not unique. Other characters, many of them
quite powerful, have come along before the PCs. Institutions of
influence have had to deal with individuals of great power long
before the PCs. The duke may have some powerful warrior or fighter
on retainer as a champion for when someone gets out of line. The
city constabulary probably has a rod of negationor a scroll of antimagic
fieldto deal with out-of-control wizards. The point is that NPCs with
resources will be prepared for great danger. The sooner the PCs real-
ize this, the less likely they will run amok in your campaign world.
WORLD-BUILDING
You may wish to build your own world. It’s a challenging and
rewarding task, but it can also be a time-consuming one.
Once you have decided to create your own world, you face a
number of choices. Do you make it like the real world, drawing from
history and real-world knowledge, or do you create something com-
pletely different? Do you draw from your favorite fictional setting or
create it all on your own? Do the laws of physics work as we know
them, or is the world flat with a dome of stars overhead? Do you use
the standard races, classes, and equipment in the Player ’s Handbook,or
do you create new ones? The questions alone are daunting, but for
those who love world-building, they are also exciting.
So where do you start? There are two approaches to creating a
campaign world.
Inside Out:Start with a small area and build outward. Don’t even
worry about what the whole world looks like, or even the kingdom.
Concentrate first on a single village or town, preferably with a dun-
geon or other adventure site nearby. Expand slowly and only as
needed. When the PCs are ready to leave the initial area (which
might not be for ten or more playing sessions, depending on your
first adventures), expand outward in all directions so you’re ready no
matter which way they go. Eventually, you will have an entire king-
dom developed, with the whole derived from what follows from the
initial starting point. Proceed to other neighboring lands, determin-
ing the political situation in each one. Keep accurate notes as you
play, for you may develop rumors of hostilities with a neighboring
kingdom before you ever develop the kingdom itself!
The advantage to this method is that you don’t need to do a lot
of work to get started. Whip up a small area—probably with a
small community—design an adventure, and go. This method
also ensures that you won’t develop areas of the campaign that are
never visited by the PCs and that you can develop things (and
change your mind) as you go.
Outside In:Start with the big picture—draw a map of an entire
continent or a portion thereof. Alternatively, you could start with a
grand design for how a number of kingdoms and nations interact
or the outline of a vast empire. You could even start with a cosmol-
ogy, deciding how the deities interact with the world, where the
world is positioned in relation with other worlds, and what the
world as a whole looks like. Only after you have this level of con-
cept design worked out should you focus on a particular area.
When you begin more detailed work, start with large-scale basics
and work down to small-scale details. For example, after you have
constructed your continent map, pick a single kingdom and create
the ruler or rulers and the general conditions. From there, focus on
some substate or region within the kingdom, develop who and
what lives there (and why), and pepper the region with a few hooks
135
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS