Gunpowder:While gunpowder burns (1 ounce consumes itself
in 1 round and illuminates like a sunrod) or even explodes in the
right conditions, it is chiefly used to propel a bullet out of the
barrel of a pistol or a rifle, or it is formed into a bomb (see below).
An ounce of gunpowder is needed to propel a bullet. Gunpowder
is sold in small kegs (15-pound capacity, 20 pounds total weight,
250 gp each) and in water-resistant powder horns (2-pound capac-
ity and total weight, 35 gp for a full powder horn). If gunpowder
gets wet, it cannot be used to fire a bullet.
Bullets:These large, round, lead projectiles are sold in bags of 10
for 3 gp. A bag of bullets weighs 2 pounds..
Pistol:This firearm holds a single shot and requires a standard
action to reload.
Musket:The musket holds a single shot and requires a standard
action to reload.
Renaissance Explosive Weapons:These explosives require
no proficiency to use. Scoring a hit with one of these weapons
requires a successful ranged touch attack aimed at a square. A
direct hit with an explosive weapon means that the weapon has hit
the creature it was aimed at and everyone within the blast radius,
including that creature, takes the indicated damage.
If the explosive misses, it still lands somewhere. Roll 1d8 to
determine the misdirection of the throw, with 1 indicating the
direction back toward the thrower and 2 through 8 counting
clockwise around the target square. (See the diagram on page 158
of the Player ’s Handbook.) Then, count 1 square away from the
target square for every two range increments of the attack.
Bomb: This round gunpowder bomb must be lit before it is
thrown. Lighting a bomb is a move action. The explosive deals 2d6
points of fire damage. Anyone caught within the blast radius can
make a DC 15 Reflex save to take half damage.
Smoke Bomb: This cylindrical bomb must be lit before it is
thrown. Lighting it is a move action. Two rounds after it is lit, this
nondamaging explosive emits a cloud of smoke (as a fog cloud
spell) in a 20-foot radius. A moderate wind (11+ mph) disperses
the smoke in 4 rounds; a strong wind (21+ mph) disperses the fog
in 1 round.
Modern and Future Technology
You could create a setting with high technology. Perhaps a starship
from a much more highly advanced civilization landed or crashed
in the campaign world. The crash might have happened long ago,
so that now the starship is a mysterious, specialized dungeon set-
ting in its own right, with a special sort of magic (advanced tech-
nology) and monsters (aliens and robots that survived the crash).
Or perhaps the advanced civilization was native to the campaign
world but is now long gone, leaving behind remnants of its
ancient cities filled with strange secrets, which now form sites for
adventures. In such a campaign, you could decide that many of the
strange creatures found in the world result from ancient genetic
engineering. Finally, perhaps members of some advanced civiliza-
tion have come to the campaign world with their advanced sci-
ence and now serve as patrons or overlords. They dole out their
technology in small doses to those who serve them well.
No matter what rationale you use to place high-tech items in
your game, they should always be like very rare magic items or
artifacts—difficult or impossible to reproduce. Treating them as
artifacts (see page 277) is most appropriate. They shouldn’t domi-
nate the game, but should serve as an occasional diversion. It’s fun
for some players when their characters occasionally use a big gun
against a dragon rather than a sword, and it’s an interesting diver-
sion to run into a warbot in a dungeon rather than a band of trolls.
But in a fantasy game, most players don’t want to do that every day.
Some advanced technological weapons are detailed below.
These weapons have no costs provided, because they cannot be
manufactured. They can only be found as artifacts.
These weapon statistics also show how to rate something in
your game that you might not know how to handle. Since you
probably have a good idea what a pistol is like, or a laser, you can
deal with such situations on firmer ground. For example, you
might want to develop a trap that fires large needles rapidly. You
could use the statistics for an automatic rifle or extrapolate from
them to get what you want. When explaining the trap, you could
even describe it to the players as resembling a machine gun to
help them understand it.
145
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS
Table 5–3: Asian Weapons
Simple WeaponsCostDmg (S)Dmg (M)CriticalRange IncrementWeightDamage Type
Ranged Weapons
Blowgun1 gp11×210 ft.2 lb.Piercing
Needles, blowgun (20)1 gp———
1
—
Martial Weapons
Light Melee Weapons
Wakizashi
2
300 gp1d41d619–20/×2—3 lb.Slashing
Exotic Weapons
Light Melee Weapons
Kusari-gama
3
10 gp1d41d6×2—3 lb.Slashing
One-Handed Melee Weapons
Katana
4
400 gp1d81d1019–20/×2—6 lb.Slashing
1 No weight worth noting.
2 Except as indicated, treat a wakizashi as a masterwork short sword.
3 Reach weapon. 
4 Except as indicated, treat a katana as a masterwork bastard sword.
Table 5–4: Renaissance Weapons
Exotic Weapons (Firearms)CostDmg (S)Dmg (M)CriticalRange IncrementWeightDamage Type
One-Handed Ranged Weapons
Pistol250 gp1d81d10×350 ft.3 lb.Piercing
Two-Handed Ranged Weapons
Musket500 gp1d101d12×3150 ft.10 lb.Piercing
Explosive Weapons
1
CostDamageBlast RadiusRange IncrementWeightDamage Type
Bomb150 gp2d65 ft.10 ft.1 lb.Fire
Smoke bomb70 gpSmoke
2
10 ft.1 lb.—
1 Bombs and smoke bombs require no proficiency to use.2 See description.