case the blinded character knows the location of the unseen oppo-
nent, but has not pinpointed him) or uses a ranged attack (in
which case, the blinded character knows the general direction of
the foe, but not his location).
—A creature with the scent ability automatically pinpoints
unseen creatures within 5 feet of its location.
FALLING
One of the most common hazards to adventurers is a fall from
some great height.
Falling Damage: The basic rule is simple: 1d6 points of
damage per 10 feet fallen, to a maximum of 20d6.
If a character deliberately jumps instead of merely slipping or
falling, the damage is the same but the first 1d6 is nonlethal dam-
age. A DC 15 Jump check or DC 15 Tumble check allows the char-
acter to avoid any damage from the first 10 feet fallen and converts
any damage from the second 10 feet to nonlethal damage. Thus, a
character who slips from a ledge 30 feet up takes 3d6 damage. If
the same character deliberately jumped, he takes 1d6 points of
nonlethal damage and 2d6 points of lethal damage. And if the
character leaps down with a successful Jump or Tumble check, he
takes only 1d6 points of nonlethal damage and 1d6 points of lethal
damage from the plunge.
Falls onto yielding surfaces (soft ground, mud) also convert the
first 1d6 of damage to nonlethal damage. This reduction is cumu-
lative with reduced damage due to deliberate jumps and the Jump
skill.
Falling into Water:Falls into water are handled somewhat
differently. If the water is at least 10 feet deep, the first 20 feet of
falling do no damage. The next 20 feet do nonlethal damage (1d3
per 10-foot increment). Beyond that, falling damage is lethal
damage (1d6 per additional 10-foot increment).
Characters who deliberately dive into water take no damage on
a successful DC 15 Swim check or DC 15 Tumble check, so long as
the water is at least 10 feet deep for every 30 feet fallen. However,
the DC of the check increases by 5 for every 50 feet of the dive.
FALLING OBJECTS
Just as characters take damage when they fall more than 10 feet, so
too do they take damage when they are hit by falling objects.
Objects that fall upon characters deal damage based on their
weight and the distance they have fallen.
Table 8–4: Damage from Falling Objects
Object WeightFalling Distance
200–101 lb.20 ft.
100–51 lb.30 ft.
50–31 lb.40 ft.
30–11 lb.50 ft.
10–6 lb.60 ft.
5–1 lb.70 ft.
For each 200 pounds of an object’s weight, the object deals 1d6
points of damage, provided it falls at least 10 feet. Distance also
comes into play, adding an additional 1d6 points of damage for
every 10-foot increment it falls beyond the first (to a maximum of
20d6 points of damage).
Objects smaller than 200 pounds also deal damage when
dropped, but they must fall farther to deal the same damage. Use
Table 8–4: Damage from Falling Objects to see how far an object of
a given weight must drop to deal 1d6 points of damage.
Example:A magic flying ship tilts to one side and drops a 400-
pound stone statue (a petrified comrade) overboard. The statue
deals 2d6 points of damage to anything it strikes by virtue of its
weight alone. If the ship were 100 feet in the air at the time, the
falling statue would deal an additional 9d6 points of damage, for a
total of 11d6.
For  each  additional  increment  an  object  falls,  it  deals  an  addi-
tional 1d6 points of damage. For example, since a 30-pound metal
sphere  must  fall  50  feet  to  deal  damage  (1d6  points  of  damage),
such a sphere that fell 150 feet would deal 3d6 points of damage.
Objects weighing less than 1 pound do not deal damage to those
they land upon, no matter how far they have fallen.
HEAT DANGERS
The hot desert sun can be as deadly an enemy as a hostile tribe of
orcs. Prolonged exposure to hot temperatures can quickly wear
down a character, and heatstroke can be deadly.
Heat deals nonlethal damage that cannot be recovered until the
character gets cooled off (reaches shade, survives until nightfall,
gets doused in water, is targeted by endure elements, and so forth).
Once rendered unconscious through the accumulation of non-
lethal damage, the character begins to take lethal damage at the
same rate.
A character in very hot conditions (above 90° F) must make a
Fortitude saving throw each hour (DC 15, +1 for each previous
check) or take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage. Characters wear-
ing heavy clothing or armor of any sort take a –4 penalty on their
saves. A character with the Survival skill may receive a bonus on
this saving throw and may be able to apply this bonus to other
characters as well (see the skill description, page 83 of the Player ’s
Handbook). Characters reduced to unconsciousness begin taking
lethal damage (1d4 points per hour).
In severe heat (above 110° F), a character must make a Fortitude
save once every 10 minutes (DC 15, +1 for each previous check) or
take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage. Characters wearing heavy
clothing or armor of any sort take a –4 penalty on their saves. A
character with the Survival skill may receive a bonus on this
saving throw and may be able to apply this bonus to other charac-
ters as well. Characters reduced to unconsciousness begin taking
lethal damage (1d4 points per each 10-minute period).
A character who takes any nonlethal damage from heat expo-
sure now suffers from heatstroke and is fatigued (see page 301).
These penalties end when the character recovers the nonlethal
damage she took from the heat.
Extreme heat (air temperature over 140° F, fire, boiling water,
lava) deals lethal damage. Breathing air in these temperatures
deals 1d6 points of damage per minute (no save). In addition, a
character must make a Fortitude save every 5 minutes (DC 15, +1
per previous check) or take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage.
Those wearing heavy clothing or any sort of armor take a –4
penalty on their saves. In addition, those wearing metal armor or
coming into contact with very hot metal are affected as if by a
heat metalspell.
Boiling water deals 1d6 points of scalding damage, unless the
character is fully immersed, in which case it deals 10d6 points of
damage per round of exposure.
Catching on Fire
Characters exposed to burning oil, bonfires, and noninstanta-
neous magic fires such as a wall of fire might find their clothes,
hair, or equipment on fire. Spells such as fireball or flame strike don’t
normally set a character on fire, since the heat and flame from
these come and go in a flash.
Characters at risk of catching fire are allowed a DC 15 Reflex
save to avoid this fate. If a character’s clothes or hair catch fire, he
303
CHAPTER 8:
GLOSSARY
VARIANT: LESS LETHAL FALLS
Generous DMs who feel that falling is too lethal can make the first 1d6
of  falling  damage  always  nonlethal  damage,  no  matter  what  the
circumstances.
pqqrs
pqqrs