68
•Magic  traps  permit  a  saving  throw  in  order  to  avoid  the  effect
(DC 10 + spell level ×1.5).
•Magic traps may be disarmed by a rogue (and only a rogue) with
a successful Disable Device check (DC 25 + spell level).
ELEMENTS OF A TRAP
All traps—mechanical or magic—have the following elements:
trigger, reset, Search DC, Disable Device DC, attack bonus (or
saving throw or onset delay), damage/effect, and Challenge
Rating. Some traps may also include optional elements, such as
poison or a bypass. These characteristics are described below.
Trigger
A trap’s trigger determines how it is sprung.
Location:A location trigger springs a trap when someone
stands in a particular square. For example, a covered pit trap typi-
cally activates when a creature steps on a certain spot.
Proximity: This trigger activates the trap when a creature ap-
proaches within a certain distance of it. A proximity trigger differs
from a location trigger in that the creature need not be standing in
a particular square. Creatures that are flying can spring a trap with
a proximity trigger but not one with a location trigger. Mechanical
proximity triggers are extremely sensitive to the slightest change
in the air. This makes them useful only in places such as crypts,
where the air is unusually still.
The proximity trigger used most often for magic device traps is
the alarmspell. Unlike when the spell is cast, an alarmspell used
as a trigger can have an area that’s no larger than the area the trap
is meant to protect.
Some magic device traps have special proximity triggers that
activate only when certain kinds of creatures approach. For
example, a detect good spell can serve as a proximity trigger on an
evil altar, springing the attached trap only when someone of good
alignment gets close enough to it.
Sound: This trigger springs a magic trap when it detects any
sound. A sound trigger functions like an ear and has a +15 bonus on
Listen checks. A successful Move Silently check, magical silence, and
other effects that would negate hearing defeat it. A trap with a
sound trigger requires the casting of clairaudienceduring its con-
struction.
Visual: This trigger for magic traps works like an actual eye,
springing the trap whenever it “sees” something. A trap with a
visual trigger requires the casting of arcane eye, clairvoyance,or true
seeingduring its construction. Sight range and the Spot bonus con-
ferred on the trap depend on the spell chosen, as shown.
SpellSight RangeSpot Bonus
arcane eyeLine of sight (unlimited range)+20
clairvoyanceOne preselected location+15
true seeingLine of sight (up to 120 ft.)+30
If you want the trap to “see” in the dark, you must either choose
the true seeingoption or add darkvisionto the trap as well. (Dark-
vision limits the trap’s sight range in the dark to 60 feet.) If invisi-
bility, disguises, or illusions can fool the spell being used, they can
fool the visual trigger as well.
Touch: A touch trigger, which springs the trap when touched,
is one of the simplest kinds of trigger to construct. This trigger
may be physically attached to the part of the mechanism that
deals the damage (such as a needle that springs out of a lock), or it
may not. You can make a magic touch trigger by adding alarmto
the trap and reducing the area of the effect to cover only the trig-
ger spot.
Timed: This trigger periodically springs the trap after a certain
duration has passed. A sharpened blade that thrusts out from a slit
in a corridor wall every 4 rounds is an example of a timed trigger.
Spell:All spell traps have this kind of trigger. The appropriate
spell descriptions in the Player ’s Handbookexplain the trigger con-
ditions for traps that contain spell triggers.
Reset
A reset element is the set of conditions under which a trap be-
comes ready to trigger again.
No Reset: Short of completely rebuilding the trap, there’s no
way to trigger it more than once. Spell traps have no reset element.
Repair: To get the trap functioning again, you must repair it.
Manual: Resetting the trap requires someone to move the parts
back into place. This is the kind of reset element most mechanical
traps have.
Automatic: The trap resets itself, either immediately or after a
timed interval.
Repairing and Resetting Mechanical Traps
Repairing a mechanical trap requires a Craft (trapmaking) check
against a DC equal to the one for building it. The cost for raw mate-
rials is one-fifth of the trap’s original market price. To calculate
how long it takes to fix a trap, use the same calculations you would
for building it, but use the cost of the raw materials required for
repair in place of the market price.
Resetting a trap usually takes only a minute or so—someone
just has to lever the trapdoor back into place, reload the crossbow
behind the wall, or push the poisoned needle back into the lock.
For a trap with a more difficult reset method, you should set the
time and labor required.
Bypass (Optional Element)
If the builder of a trap wants to be able to move past the trap after
it is created or placed, it’s a good idea to build in a bypass mecha-
nism—something that temporarily disarms the trap. Bypass ele-
ments are typically used only with mechanical traps; spell traps
usually have built-in allowances for the caster to bypass them.
Lock:A lock bypass requires a DC 30 Open Lock check to open.
Hidden Switch: A hidden switch requires a DC 25 Search
check to locate.
Hidden Lock: A hidden lock combines the features above,
requiring a DC 25 Search check to locate and a DC 30 Open Lock
check to open.
Search and Disable Device DCs 
The builder sets the Search and Disable Device DCs for a mechan-
ical trap. For a magic trap, the values depend on the highest-level
spell used.
Mechanical Trap: The base DC for both Search and Disable
Device checks is 20. Raising or lowering either of these DCs
affects the base cost (Table 3–15) and possibly the CR (Table 3–13).
Magic Trap: The DC for both Search and Disable Device checks
is equal to 25 + the spell level of the highest-level spell used. Only
characters with the trap sense class feature can attempt a Search
check or a Disable Device check involving a magic trap. These
DCs do not affect the trap’s cost or CR.
Attack Bonus/Saving Throw DC
A trap usually either makes an attack roll or forces a saving throw
to avoid it. Occasionally a trap uses both of these options, or nei-
ther (see Never Miss, page 70).
Pits:These are holes (covered or not) that characters can fall
into and take damage. A pit needs no attack roll, but a successful
Reflex save (DC set by the builder) avoids it. Other save-depend-
ent mechanical traps also fall into this category.
Pits in dungeons come in three basic varieties: uncovered, cov-
ered, and chasms. Like a cliff or a wall, a pit or a chasm forces charac-
ters to either detour around it or take the time and trouble to figure
out a way across. Pits and chasms can be defeated by judicious appli-
cation of the Climb skill, the Jump skill, or various magical means.
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES