Selling Cursed Items
Suppose you have planted an amulet of inescapable locationin a trea-
sure hoard, and the characters have snapped it up—but they
believe it to be an amulet of proof against detection and location.
Now, the characters are back in town and divvying up treasure.
They decide to sell the amulet, expecting to get half of the hefty
35,000 gp market price. What do you do?
Alternatively, the characters know that the item is cursed and
want to try to sell it off as its much more expensive
noncursed version. What happens next?
First, remember that the prospective buyer of the
item has a chance of knowing the item is cursed. As
a good rule of thumb, give the buyer the same 1%
chance per level as any caster of the identify spell. In
some cases, the buyer may have access to analyze
dweomer,which always identifies a cursed item for
what it is. A buyer may be willing to pay to have
the spell cast, or may demand that the characters
pay for such a casting, before he will go through
with the deal.
The characters should be aware (although it’s
not up to you to tell them) that trying to dupe
someone into buying a cursed item is an evil act.
They should also consider the fact that some-
one who bought an item from them that
turned out to be cursed will usually seek
reparations ranging from a full refund to
bloody, deadly vengenance.
ARTIFACTS
The misty past holds many secrets. Great wizards and
powerful clerics, not to mention the deities them-
selves, have used spells and created items that are
beyond the ken of present-day knowledge. These
items survive as artifacts, but their means of cre-
ation are long gone.
Artifacts are extremely powerful. Rather than merely another
form of magic equipment, they are the sorts of legendary relics
that whole campaigns can be based on. Each could be the center of
a whole set of adventures—a quest to recover it, a fight against a
opponent wielding it, a mission to cause its destruction, and so on.
No table has been included to randomly generate specific arti-
facts, since these items should only enter a campaign through
deliberate choice on your part.
MINOR ARTIFACTS
Minor artifacts are not necessarily unique items. Even so, they are
magic items that no longer can be created, at least by common
mortal means.
Minor Artifact Descriptions
Described below is a selection of the most well-known (not neces-
sarily the most numerous) minor artifacts.
Book of Exalted Deeds:This holy book is sacred to divine
spellcasters of good alignment (LG, NG, CG). Study of the work re-
quires one week, but upon completion a good spellcaster gains a
+1 inherent bonus to Wisdom and one experience level—receiv-
ing enough XP to put the character’s XP total midway between the
minimum needed for his new (higher) level and the minimum
needed for the level beyond that.
Divine spellcasters neither good nor evil (LN, N, CN) lose
2d6×1,000 XP for perusing the work. Evil divine spellcasters (LE,
NE, CE) lose twice that amount. In addition, they have to atone
(see the atonementspell) in order to gain further experience.
Nonspellcasters who handle or read the book are unaffected.
Arcane spellcasters who read it take 1 point of permanent Intelli-
gence drain and lose 1d6×1,000 XP unless they make a DC 15
Will save.
Except as indicated above, the writing in a book of exalted deeds
can’t be distinguished from any other magic book, libram, tome,
or so on until perused. Once read, the book vanishes, and the
same character can never benefit from reading another book of
exalted deeds.
Strong evocation [good]; CL 19th; Weight 3 lb.
Book of Infinite Spells:This work bestows upon any charac-
ter of any class the ability to use the spells within its pages.
However, any character not already able to use spells gains
one negative level for as long as the book is in her posses-
sion or while she uses its power. A book of infinite spells
contains 1d8+22 pages. The nature of each page is
determined by a dice roll: 01–50, arcane spell;
51–100, divine spell.
Determine the exact spell by using the
tables for determining major scroll
spells  (the  third  column  on  Table
7–22: Scroll Spell Levels, along with
Table 7–23: Arcane Spell Scrolls and
Table  7–24:  Divine  Spell  Scrolls).
Once a page is turned, it can never be
flipped back—paging through a book of
infinite spellsis a one-way trip. If the book is
closed, it always opens again to the page it
was on before the book was closed. When
the last page is turned, the book vanishes.
Once per day the owner of the book can
cast the spell to which the book is opened. If
that spell happens to be one that is on the char-
acter’s class spell list, she can cast it up to four
times per day. The pages cannot be ripped out
without destroying the book. Similarly, the spells
cannot be cast as scroll spells, nor can they be
copied into a spellbook—their magic is bound
up permanently within the book itself.
The owner of the book need not have the book on her person in
order to use its power. The book can be stored in a place of safety
while the owner is adventuring and still allow its owner to cast
spells by means of its power.
Each time a spell is cast, there is a chance that the energy con-
nected with its use causes the page to magically turn despite all
precautions. The owner knows this and may even benefit from the
turning by gaining access to a new spell. The chance of a page
turning depends on the spell the page contains and what sort of
spellcaster the owner is.
ConditionChance of Page Turning
Caster employing a spell usable by own class and level10%
Caster employing a spell not usable by own class and level20%
Nonspellcaster employing divine spell25%
Nonspellcaster employing arcane spell30%
Treat each spell use as if a scroll were being employed, for pur-
poses of determining casting time, spell failure, and so on.
Strong (all schools); CL 18th; Weight 3 lb.
Book of Vile Darkness:This is a work of ineffable evil—meat
and drink to divine spellcasters of that alignment (LE, NE, CE). To
fully consume the contents requires one week of study. Once this
has been accomplished, an evil spellcaster gains a +1 inherent
bonus to Wisdom and one experience level—receiving enough
XP to put the character’s XP total midway between the minimum
needed for his new (higher) level and the minimum needed for
the level beyond that.
All lawful neutral, neutral, or chaotic neutral characters who
touch the book take 5d4 points of damage, and reading its pages
277
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Book of 
vile darkness