1
BUILDING A CITY 
A Web Enhancement for the
DUNGEONMASTER's Guidev.3.5
CREDITS
Design:David Noonan, James Wyatt
Editing:Penny Williams
Typesetting:Nancy Walker
Design Manager :Ed Stark
Web Production:Julia Martin
Web Development:Mark A. Jindra
Graphic Design:Dawn Murin
Based  on  the  original  DUNGEONS&  DRAGONS
®
game  by  E.
Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson and on the new edition of the
D
UNGEONS
&  DRAGONS
game  designed  by  Jonathan  Tweet,
Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Rich Baker, and Peter Adkison.
D&D,  DUNGEONS&  DRAGONS,  and  DUNGEONMASTERare  registered  trademarks  owned
by  Wizards  of  the  Coast,  Inc.  The  d20  logo  is  a  trademark  owned  by  Wizards  of  the
Coast,  Inc.  All  Wizards  characters,  character  names,  and  the  distinctive  likenesses
thereof are trademarks owned by Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
This material is protected under the copyright laws of the 
United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use 
of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited 
without the express written permission of 
Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
©2003 Wizards of the Coast, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Made in the U.S.A. 
This product is a work of fiction. Any similarity to actual people, 
organizations, places, or events is purely coincidental.
This Wizards of the Coast game product contains 
no Open Game Content. 
No portion of this work may be reproduced in any form 
without written permission. To learn more about the 
Open Gaming License and the d20 System License, 
please visit www
.wizards.com/d20.
Visit the D
UNGEONS& DRAGONSwebsite at
www
.wizards.com/dnd.
If you plan to run an extended adventure—or even a
whole campaign—in an urban environment, it’s impor-
tant to put some time and effort into describing the
details of your city. Chapter 5 of the DUNGEONMASTER’s
Guidefor D&D v.3.5 provides a basic framework for
describing some key features of a city, such as its power
centers, assets, and highest-level nonplayer characters.
This web enhancement expands that basic system into
one that is more complex, but well worth the extra work
in terms of the payoff for running a city-based campaign.
The basic unit of this city construction system is the
district. A district is roughly equivalent to a modern city
block or a small neighborhood. On average, a district
represents about 500 people, though some districts (such
as tenements) have a higher population density than
others (such as noble estates). Because a district is so
large, this system is unsuitable for use with smaller set-
tlements. A district has its own population number, gp
limit, assets, important NPCs, and character, or “feel.”
It’s much easier for both the Dungeon Master and
the players to think about a metropolis made up of
eighty districts than to contemplate a teeming popula-
tion of 39,761 individuals. The city structure becomes
even easier to deal with if you assume that wards or
neighborhoods are just clusters of identical districts.
Thus, a metropolis might have a dozen wards: water-
front, noble’s villas, shantytowns, merchant’s quarter,
temple quarter, and so on.
As a starting point, use twenty districts for a small
city, forty for a large city, and eighty for a metropolis. If
you need to, you can always add more districts, but the
total population number you get by doing that may
bump your city up a size category. Types of districts are
given on Table 1–1: District Types.
DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
Each district’s description includes the following key
information.
Buildings:This entry details what sorts of buildings
might be found in the district. See Example Buildings
sidebar for businesses common to certain building types.
First Impression:This entry consists of a sen-
tence or two that describes the flavor or feel of the dis-
trict—that is, what sorts of sights, sounds, and smells
characters are likely to notice while casually passing
through it. 
Social Class:This entry denotes the social class of
the residents (upper, middle, or lower).