By contrast, imagine a +2 dancing longsword(6 points, 2 for the +2
enhancement bonus and 4 because dancing is the equivalent of a
+4 bonus [see Table 7–14: Melee Weapon Special Abilities]) with
an Intelligence score of 10 (no points), Wisdom score of 18 (4
points), and Charisma score of 18 (4 points). Add the lesser powers
of deathwatch, 10 ranks in Intimidate, and darkness (3 points), the
greater power of fear (2 points) and the special purpose of slaying
spellcasters (4 points). Also include the fact that the weapon is
telepathic (1 point) and reads languages (1 point), and the sword
has an Ego score of 25.
ITEMS AGAINST CHARACTERS
When an item has an Ego of its own, it has a will of its own. The
item is, of course, absolutely true to its alignment. If the charac-
ter who possesses the item is not true to that alignment’s goals or
the item’s special purpose, personality conflict—item against
character—results. Similarly, any item with an Ego score of 20 or
higher always considers itself superior to any character, and a
personality conflict results if the possessor does not always agree
with the item.
When a personality conflict occurs, the possessor must make a
Will saving throw (DC = item’s Ego). If the possessor succeeds,
she is dominant. If she fails, the item is dominant. Dominance
lasts for one day or until a critical situation occurs (such as a
major battle, a serious threat to either the item or the character,
and so on—DM’s discretion). Should a item gain dominance, it
resists the character’s desires and demands concessions such as
any of the following.
•Removal of associates or items whose alignment or personality
is distasteful to the item.
•The character divesting herself of all other magic items or items
of a certain type.
•Obedience from the character so the item can direct where they
go for its own purposes.
•Immediate  seeking  out  and  slaying  of  creatures  hateful  to  the
item.
•Magical  protections  and  devices  to  protect  the  item  from
molestation when it is not in use.
•That the character carry the item with her on all occasions.
•That  the  character  relinquish  the  item  in  favor  of  a  more  suit-
able possessor due to alignment differences or conduct.
In extreme circumstances, the item can resort to even harsher
measures, such as the following acts:
•Force its possessor into combat.
•Refuse to strike opponents.
•Strike at its wielder or her associates.
•Force its possessor to surrender to an opponent.
•Cause itself to drop from the character’s grasp.
Naturally,  such  actions  are  unlikely  when  harmony  reigns
between the character’s and item’s alignments or when their pur-
poses and personalities are well matched. Even so, an item might
wish to have a lesser character possess it in order to easily establish
and maintain dominance over him, or a higher-level possessor so
as to better accomplish its goals.
All magic items with personalities desire to play an important
role in whatever activity is under way, particularly combat. Such
items are rivals of each other, even if they are of the same align-
ment. No intelligent item wants to share its wielder with others.
An intelligent item is aware of the presence of any other intelli-
gent item within 60 feet, and most intelligent items try their best
to mislead or distract their host so that she ignores or destroys the
rival. Of course, alignment might change this sort of behavior. A
holy avenger,for example, would certainly not allow destruction of
any other lawful good item and might encourage their discovery,
even at the risk of having to face grim odds to do so.
Items with personalities are never totally controlled or silenced
by the characters who possess them, even though they may never
successfully control their possessors. They may be powerless to
force their demands but remain undaunted and continue to air
their wishes and demands. Even a humble +1 weapon of unusual
nature can be a vocal martyr, denigrating its own abilities and
asking only that the character give it the chance to shatter itself
against some hated enemy.
Note:You should roleplay the item as you would any NPC.
Refer to Table 4–24: One Hundred Traits (page 128) for ideas on
personality quirks to make an intelligent item’s persona more
memorable.
INTELLIGENT ITEM EXAMPLES
The items presented below can fit directly into most campaigns,
but you should adjust them, changing their alignment, personal-
ity, or even their abilties where needed to fit the particulars of
your campaign, its history, and its characters.
Acrola, Watchful Tooth of Ashardalon:+5 keen dagger;AL
CG; Int 10, Wis 18, Cha 18; Speech, telepathy, 120 ft. darkvision,
blindsense, and hearing; Ego score 22.
Lesser Powers: Zone of truth3/day, Item has 10 ranks in Listen
(total modifier +14) and Spot (total modifier +14).
Greater Powers: Clairvoyance3/day, slow3/day.
Personality:Bards tell that a tooth pried from the living body of
the terrible dragon Ashardalon arose with its own mind and will.
The tale would seem odd, for the goals of the long knife are noth-
ing like those of the dread dragon. The well-intentioned but tire-
less dagger has taken as its personal cause that of protecting the
weak and the helpless. Acrola frequently uses its clairvoyance
power to scout out areas of trouble or evil, and then Acrola drags
its wielder into the fray.
Strong transmutation; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
keen edge;Price 132,802 gp.
Jomnoth, Giantblight:+3 giantbane dwarven waraxe;AL LG; Int
10, Wis 14, Cha 14; Speech, 120 ft. vision and hearing; Ego score 14.
Lesser Powers: Cure moderate wounds3/day, detect magicat will.
Special Purpose:Defeat/slay giants.
Dedicated Power: Song of discord.
Personality:Forged by a long-dead dwarf smith, Jomnoth, also
known as Giantblight, dates from an age of giant invasions. The
success of the waraxe cannot be questioned, since upon occasion a
single dwarf hero has struck down a number of bewildered and
overwhelmed giants. A stoic but forceful will has been incarnated
into the waraxe blade. Jomnoth speaks little, and is reluctant to
give advice or gainsay its wielder except under the most extreme
circumstances. As long its owner is willing to strike deep into the
keeps and lairs of giantkind, the waraxe never objects.
Strong conjuration; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
summon monster I;Price 176,430 gp.
Iquel:+2 holy composite longbow;AL NG; Int 17, Wis 10, Cha 17;
Speech, telepathy, 120 ft. darkvision and hearing; Ego score 16.
Lesser Powers: Daze monster 3/day, faerie fire 3/day, locate object
3/day.
Greater Powers: Lesser globe of invulnerability1/day.
Personality:A loyal and trusted companion to the hero Iquel,
this once nameless bow took its first wielder’s name after his
heroic stand against a balor. Since then, Iquel has searched for a
wielder who can live up to its high standard: a grandmaster
archer with a zeal for good. Despite its commitment to the forces
of good in the world, Iquel enjoys casual conversation, relaxation,
and delicate care.
Strong evocation (if miracleis used) [good]; CL 17th; Craft
Magic Arms and Armor, wishor miracle;Price 66,600 gp.
271
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS