Uncontrolled:An uncontrolled item occasionally activates at
random times. Roll d% every day. On a result of 01–05 (or what-
ever range the DM decides is appropriate), the item activates at
some random point during that day. Results range from the
humorous, such as when the wearer of a cursed ring of invisibility
suddenly disappears right in the middle of bargaining in the
market, to the disastrous, such as when the wielder’s wand of fire-
balldischarges in the midst of her friends—er, former friends.
Requirement:In a sense, a command word is a requirement.
Nevertheless, some items have much more stringent require-
ments that must be met for them to be usable. To keep an item
with this kind of curse functioning, one or more of the following
conditions must be met.
•Character must eat twice as much as normal.
•Character must sleep twice as much as normal.
•Character  must  undergo  a  specific  quest  (one  time  only,  and
then item functions normally thereafter).
•Character must sacrifice (destroy) 100 gp worth of valuables per
day.
•Character  must  sacrifice  (destroy)  2,000  gp  worth  of  magic
items each week.
•Character must swear fealty to a particular noble or his family.
•Character must discard all other magic items.
•Character must worship a particular deity.
•Character must change her name to a specific name. (The item
only works for characters of that name.)
•Character  must  add  a  specific  class  at  the  next  opportunity  if
not of that class already.
•Character must have a minimum number of ranks in a particu-
lar skill.
•Character must sacrifice some part of her life energy (2 points
of Constitution) one time. If the character gets the Constitution
points  back  (such  as  from  a  restorationspell),  the  item  ceases
functioning.  (The  item  does  not  cease  functioning  if  the  char-
acter  receives  a  Constitution  increase  caused  by  level  gain,  a
wish,or the use of a magic item.)
•Item must be cleansed with holy water each day.
•Item must be used to kill a living creature each day.
•Item must be bathed in volcanic lava once per month.
•Item must be used at least once a day, or it won’t function again
for its current possessor.
•Item must draw blood when wielded (weapons only). It can’t be
put away or exchanged for another weapon until it has scored a
hit.
•Item must have a particular spell cast upon it each day (such as
bless, atonement,or animate objects).
Requirements are so dependent upon suitability to the item that
they should never be determined randomly. An item with a re-
quirement that is also intelligent often imposes its requirement
through its personality. If the requirement is not met, the item
ceases to function. If it is met, usually the item functions for one
day before the requirement must be met again (although some
requirements are one time only, others monthly, and still others
continuous).
Drawback:Items with drawbacks are usually still beneficial to
the possessor (for instance, a weapon with an enhancement bonus
continues to benefit its wielder in combat), but they also carry
some negative aspect. You might think of them as “give and take”
items. Although sometimes drawbacks occur only when the item
is used (or held, in the case of some items such as weapons), usu-
ally the drawback remains with the character for as long as she has
the item.
Roll on the table below to generate a drawback that (unless oth-
erwise indicated) remains in effect as long as the item is in the
character’s possession.
d%Drawback
01–04Character’s hair grows 1 inch longer. Only happens once.
05–09Character either shrinks 1/2 inch (01–50 on d%) or grows
that much taller (51–100). Only happens once.
10–13Temperature around item is 10°F cooler than normal.
14–17Temperature around item is 10°F warmer than normal.
18–21Character’s hair color changes.
22–25Character’s skin color changes.
26–29Character now bears some identifying mark (tattoo, weird
glow, or the like).
30–32Character’s gender changes.
33–34Character’s race or kind changes.
35Character is afflicted with a random disease that cannot be
cured.
36–39Item continually emits a disturbing sound (moaning,
weeping, screaming, cursing, insults).
40Item looks ridiculous (garishly colored, silly shape, glows
bright pink, . . .).
41–45Character becomes selfishly possessive about the item.
46–49Character becomes paranoid about losing the item and
afraid of damage occurring to it.
50–51Character’s alignment changes.
52–54Character must attack nearest creature (5% chance [01–05
on d%] each day).
55–57Character is stunned for 1d4 rounds once item function is
finished (or randomly, 1/day).
58–60Character’s vision is blurry (–2 penalty on attack rolls,
saves, and skill checks requiring vision).
61–64Character gains one negative level.
65Character gains two negative levels.
66–70Character must make a Will save each day or take 1 point of
Intelligence damage.
71–75Character must make a Will save each day or take 1 point of
Wisdom damage.
76–80Character must make a Will save each day or take 1 point of
Charisma damage.
81–85Character must make a Fortitude save each day or take 1
point of Constitution damage.
86–90Character must make a Fortitude save each day or take 1
point of Strength damage.
91–95Character must make a Fortitude save each day or take 1
point of Dexterity damage.
96Character is polymorphed into a specific creature (5%
chance [01–05 on d%] each day).
97Character cannot cast arcane spells.
98Character cannot cast divine spells.
99Character cannot cast any spells.
100DM either picks one of the above that’s appropriate or
creates a drawback specifically for that item.
Completely Different Effect:The DM should choose a nega-
tive effect for the item, perhaps using the specific cursed items
(see below) as examples. The item may seem to be the item that
was originally determined, but at some juncture it displays differ-
ent properties altogether.
SPECIFIC CURSED ITEMS
The items on Table 7–31: Specific Cursed Items are provided as
examples of cursed items. They are given creation prerequisites,
should someone want to intentionally create them (although that
does not need to be the origin of the item if you choose other-
wise). Note, however, two exceptions: The crystal hypnosis ball and
the bag of devouring cannot be created by any known means. The
bag of devouringis a creature, and the crystal hypnosis ballis the tool
of powerful NPCs such as liches.
A simple detect magicspell yields a misleading aura and strength,
often indicating that the item is a noncursed item of similar sort.
273
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS