saving throws. Once the damage from the spell is assessed, both
sides roll initiative.
Example (Time to Prepare):Jozan the cleric hears the sounds of
creatures moving beyond a door in a dungeon. He also hears some
voices, and determines
that the creatures are
speaking Orc. He fig-
ures  that  they  don’t
know   he’s   there.   He
takes the time to cast blessand
shield  of  faithon  himself
before  opening  the  door
and using a standard action
to cast hold personon the
first foe he sees. He can cast
the hold  person  spell  before
anyone makes an initiative check,
unless the orcs heard him casting
blessor shield of faithin the previous 2
rounds, in which case they become
aware, Jozan doesn’t get the action that
enabled him to cast hold person,and he’d
better hope he gets the higher result on his
initiative check.
Both Sides Aware at the Same
Time: If both sides are aware at
the same time and can interact,
both should roll initiative and
resolve actions normally.
If each   side   becomes
aware of the other but cannot
interact immediately, track time in rounds,
giving both sides the same amount of time
in full rounds, until the two sides can
begin to interact.
Example (Both Aware and Can Interact
Immediately):A party of adventurers burst
into a dungeon room full of orcs, and neither
knew of the other ahead of time. All are equally surprised and
equally flat-footed. Initiative is rolled, reflecting that those charac-
ters with better reflexes act quicker in such situations.
Example (Both Aware but Cannot Interact Immediately):A party of
adventurers comes along a dungeon corridor and hears the
laughter of orcs beyond the door ahead. Meanwhile, the orc
lookout sees the adventures through a peephole in the door and
warns his comrades. The door is closed, so no direct interaction
is possible yet. Jozan casts bless. Lidda drinks a potion. Tordek and
Mialee move up to the door. At the same time, the orcs move into
position, and one uses aring of invisibilityto hide. The DM
records the passage of 1 round. The adventurers arrange them-
selves around the door and make a quick plan. The orcs turn over
tables and nock arrows in their shortbows. The DM tracks
another round. The fighter opens the door, and the DM calls for
an initiative check from all. The third round begins, this time
with the order of actions being important (and dictated by the
initiative check results).
Some Creatures on One or Both Sides Aware: In this case,
only the creatures that are aware can act. These creatures can take
standard actions before the main action starts.
Example: Lidda is scouting ahead. She and a gargoyle spot each
other simultaneously, but the rest of Lidda’s party doesn’t see the
monster (though they are close enough to hear any fighting that
erupts). Lidda and the gargoyle each get standard actions, and then
normal combat starts. Lidda and the gargoyle roll initiative
before taking their actions, and everyone else rolls ini-
tiative after those actions are concluded.
The Surprise Round
When only one side is aware of the other, the DM runs the first
round of combat as a surprise round. In this round, each charac-
ter gets only a standard action. Only those aware of the other side
can take any action at all. This rule reflects the fact that even
when a combatant is prepared, some amount of time is spent
assessing the situation, and thus only standard actions are
allowed to begin with.
This rule makes initiative have less of an impact, since it is in
the first round when initiative matters most. Even if a warrior gets
the jump on an opponent, at best he can make a single attack
against a foe before that foe can react.
NEW COMBATANTS
The adventurers are fighting for their lives against a group of trolls
intent on throwing them into a dank pit to feed to the dragon that
23
CHAPTER 2:
USING 
THE RULES
VARIANT: SAPIENT MOUNTS
A paladin’s mount is as smart as some characters. Giant eagles, giant
owls, and pegasi are all highly intelligent. When such creatures are part
of the action, you have two choices.
•You  can  force  the  mount  to  act  on  its  rider’s  initiative,  just  like
mounts of animal intelligence. This means that mount and rider act,
essentially, simultaneously.
•You  can  ask  the  player  to  make  a  separate  initiative  check  for  the
mount. This means the mount moves and attacks at its own place in
the  initiative  order,  reinforcing  its  nature  as  a  separate  character.
However,  that  may  be  extremely  inconvenient  for  a  rider  who  is
carried away from her opponent! In such cases, of course, the rider
can  always  delay  to  synchronize  her  initiative  check  result  with  her
mount’s.  Likewise,  the  mount  may  choose  to  delay  to  coincide  its
movement with its rider’s.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs