his chapter has three parts: Special Abilities, Condition
Summary, and The Environment. Throughout the game,
you’ll find references to special abilities of all kinds—rays
of energy, life-numbing touches, and the ability to become
insubstantial, to name a few. This section identifies the most
significant abilities and provides details on how to use them
and what they look like.
Following this section you can find a comprehensive sum-
mary of character conditions, such as panicked, paralyzed, and
helpless. If a character falls victim to any sort of debilitation or
strange effect, refer to that condition’s listing for how to handle
the situation.
Finally, perils of the environment such as drowning, and the
effects of heat and cold are covered in the closing section.
SPECIAL ABILITIES
A special ability is either extraordinary, spell-like, or supernatural
in nature.
Extraordinary Abilities (Ex):Extraordinary abilities are non-
magical. They are, however, not something that just anyone can
do or even learn to do without extensive training (which, in game
terms, means to take a new character class). A monk’s ability to
evade attacks and a barbarian’s uncanny dodge are extraordinary
abilities. Effects or areas that negate or disrupt magic have no
effect on extraordinary abilities.
Spell-Like Abilities (Sp):Spell-like abilities, as the name
implies, are spells and magical abilities that are very much like
spells. Spell-like abilities are subject to spell resistance and dispel
magic. They do not function in areas where magic is suppressed or
negated (such as anantimagic field).
Supernatural Abilities (Su):Supernatural abilities are
magical but not spell-like. This far-reaching category
includes the basilisk’s petrifying stare, the monk’s kistrike,
and the ghoul’s paralytic touch. Supernatural abilities are
not subject to spell resistance and do not function in areas
where  magic  is  suppressed  or  negated  (such  as  an
antimagic field). A supernatural ability’s effect cannot be
dispelled and is not subject to counterspells.
See Table 8–1, on the next page, for a summary of the
types of special abilities.
ABILITY SCORE LOSS
An undead shadow touches Tordek, and his axe immedi-
ately feels heavier in his hand. A giant wasp stings
Mialee, and her normally graceful movements become
halting and stiff.
Various attacks cause ability score loss, either ability
damage or ability drain. Points lost to ability damage
return at the rate of 1 point per day (or double that if
the character gets complete bed rest) to each dam-
aged ability, and the spells lesser restorationand restora-
tionoffset ability damage as well. Ability drain, how-
ever, is permanent, though restorationcan restore
even those lost ability score points.
While any loss is debilitating, losing all points in
an ability score can be devastating.
•Strength 0 means that the character cannot move at
all. He lies helpless on the ground.
•Dexterity 0 means that the character cannot move
at all. He stands motionless, rigid, and helpless.
•Constitution 0 means that the character is dead.
289
Illus. by  A. Swekel