poorest of the poor live here in decrepit buildings,
refugee colonies, and squatter camps.
Buildings:Poor residences (100).
First Impression: Lean-tos, smoky fires, and
makeshift  hovels  crowd  in  among  the  debris  and
rubble of the dirty, destitute streets.
Social Class:Lower class.
Slave Quarter
Slaves merit slightly better huts than those who live in
a shantytown, if only because their masters care about
their welfare to some small degree. Districts such as
this are rare, since good-aligned societies find slavery
abhorrent.
Buildings:Overseer’s station, poor services (5),
poor residences (94).
First Impression: Whip-wielding masters lead
chained slaves in threadbare robes from place to place.
Few of the slaves are bold enough to meet the gaze of a
bystander.
Social Class:Lower class.
Slum
This district is clearly for the down-and-out. A slum
falls somewhere between poor apartments and a shan-
tytown on the scale of poverty and misery.
Buildings:Temple (Olidammara or Pelor), poor
lodging (1), poor food (3), poor trades (10), poor serv-
ices (5), poor residences (70).
First Impression: Home to the destitute, this
neighborhood features a mix of shanties, hovels, and
tenements in disrepair. Trash fills the streets and alleys,
and the stench of offal mixed with rotting flesh and
even less wholesome substances hangs heavy in the air.
Social Class:Lower class.
Tannery District
Tanneries—businesses that turn animal hides into
leather—are typically in lower-class neighborhoods
simply because they smell unbelievably bad. No one
who can afford to do otherwise lives near a tannery.
Buildings:Temple (any, especially poorer or
more obscure faiths), poor lodging (2), poor food (7),
poor trades (tanners, dyers, and other folk who practice
odiferous trades) (60), poor services (30).
First Impression: The acrid smell of tanning
hides would reveal the nature of this district even to a
blindfolded person. A cluster of small, dingy shops
caters to the unfortunate denizens of this nauseating
district.
Social Class:Lower class.
Tavern District
Adventurers spend a lot of time in taverns, and most
cities of any size feature at least one. Inns sandwiched
among the bars provide revelers with relatively safe
places in which to sleep off their intoxication.
Buildings:Temple (Fharlanghn or Olidammara),
average lodging (3), poor lodging (20), average food (6),
poor food (30), poor trades (10), poor services (10), poor
residences (20).
First Impression: By night, inebriated revelers
stumble forth into the crowded streets from literally
dozens of taverns. By day, this district is a virtual ghost
town, with only cleanup crews, delivery personnel, and
the  occasional  determined  drunk  to  liven  up  the
streetscape.
Social Class:Lower class.
Tenement District
This district is similar to a slum, but without any
nearby businesses to support its poverty-stricken popu-
lace. This district must be placed close to one in which
even the desperately poor can acquire staples.
Buildings:Poor residences (60).
First Impression: Crammed together like so
many sardines, the poor residents of this district cluster
on stoops, in their rat-infested apartments, and in the
streets and alleys.
Social Class:Lower class.
Theater District
Theaters tend to spring up in lower-class neighbor-
hoods because rent is cheaper there. Drama patrons
rarely linger for long, although nearby pubs and shops
entice some to stay and celebrate a fine performance.
This district can serve as a musician’s quarter or a
dancehall district with only a name change.
Buildings:Theaters (4), temple (Olidammara),
poor lodging (10), poor food (20), poor trades (20), poor
services (30), poor residences (15).
First Impression: Each theater features a large
sign promising comedy, tragedy, and inspiration—often
all in the same play. Lines of people wait outside the box
offices, and periodically a large crowd emerges from a
theater, heatedly discussing the play that has just ended.
Social Class:Lower class.
Undercity
This district, typically situated underneath the city’s
streets, is a combination of a dungeon and a neighbor-
hood. The residents of the city may or may not be
aware of the undercity’s existence.
8