272
Bosk, the Poetic Blade:+2 longsword; AL N; Int 14, Wis 14, Cha
10; Speech, 30 ft. vision and hearing; Ego score 8.
Lesser Powers: Bless 3/day, hold person3/day.
Personality:Created by a wizard experimenting with sentience,
Bosk was later sold by its creator and has changed hands many
times. Always willing to offer its opinion, advice, a story, or even a
poem of its own devising, Bosk has never met an owner who was a
perfect match, though perhaps a deaf swordwielder would be best.
Moderate divination; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
legend lore;Price 15,815 gp.
Vesac, the Deceiver:Luck blade;AL NE; Int 16, Wis 10, Cha 16;
Speech, 60 ft. darkvision and hearing; Ego score 15.
Lesser Powers: Minor image1/day, major image 1/day, 10 ranks in
Bluff (total modifier +13).
Personality:A powerful and selfish blade, Vesac has served as the
weapon of dozens of petty tyrants and would-be conquerors. The
lure of its powerful three wishesdraws in many who seek to gain
power, wealth, or advance their own agenda. However, Vesac itself
is only interested in advancing the tales of its own legend. Despite
having many wielders over the ages, it continues to hoard its
wishes,frequently deluding wielders (by using its illusion powers)
into thinking that their desires have been fulfilled.
Strong evocation (if miracleis used); CL 17th; Craft Magic Arms
and Armor, wishor miracle;Price 161,560 gp; Cost 80,780 gp +
5,718 XP.
Zax, Cloak of Kings: Cloak of Charisma +6;AL LN; Int 10, Wis
14, Cha 14; Speech, 120 ft. vision and hearing; Ego score 5.
Lesser Powers: Zone of truth3/day, Item has 10 ranks in Diplo-
macy (total modifier +12) and 10 ranks in Knowledge (history)
(total modifier +10).
Personality:This magic cloak has provided advice to royal courts
for generation after generation, not only the settling of disputes,
but also with accounts of the foibles of leaders past. Zax, as this
cape has always been known, is a fine-looking garment of sable
and fur. Like most rulers, Zax itself has grown somewhat stern and
aloof over the years, though its Ego has never been strong enough
to dominate its wearer.
Moderate conjuration; CL 15th; Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s
splendor;Price 56,500 gp.
CURSED ITEMS
In the process of crafting a magic item, so many delicate factors
have to be taken into account that occasionally things are bound
to go awry. These small errors are often readily apparent and usu-
ally show up immediately. Sometimes, however, they are more
subtle and don’t emerge until days, months, or even years later.
Other factors can make a magic item go wrong as well—things
not the fault of its creator in any way. The forces of chaos and gen-
eral entropy can cause magic to decay or become corrupted. Time
corrodes all things—even magic. Long exposure to powerful mag-
ical forces, gateways to other planes, or even the proximity of
other magic items or creatures can alter a magic item in odd ways.
Finally, items with unpredictable or cursed effects can be created
by the devious intention of spellcasters who are malicious, chaotic,
or simply insane. These are the most dangerous cursed items of all.
Cursed items are magic items with some sort of potentially neg-
ative impact. Sometimes they’re directly bad for the user; some-
times they’re just inconvenient. Occasionally they mix bad with
good, forcing characters to make difficult choices. If you want to
include the chance for cursed items in your game, determine trea-
sure randomly as usual. Whenever you roll for a magic item, how-
ever, make a second secret d% roll. On a result of 01–05, the item
generated is cursed in some way. To determine how the item is
cursed, consult the table below.
Cursed Item Common Curses
d%Curse
01–15Delusion
16–35Opposite effect or target
36–45Intermittent functioning
46–60Requirement
61–75Drawback
76–90Completely different effect
91–100Substitute specific cursed item
Delusion: The user believes the item is what it appears to be,
yet it actually has no magical power other than to deceive. The
user is mentally fooled into thinking the item is functioning
(making him invisible, emitting lightning bolts, or whatever)
and cannot be convinced otherwise without the help of a remove
cursespell.
Opposite Effect or Target:These cursed items malfunction, so
that either they do the opposite of what the creator intended, or
they target the user instead of someone else. For example, eyes of
charming with the opposite effect makes targets hostile rather than
charmingthem. A staff of healingcauses wounds. Eyes of petrification
turn the wearer to stone. A magic arrow curves around to strike the
archer. The interesting point to keep in mind here is that these
items aren’t always bad to have. A wand of lightning boltthat heals
rather than harms can be used as a potent healing item.
Opposite-effect items include weapons that impose penalties
on attack and damage rolls rather than bonuses. Just as a character
shouldn’t necessarily immediately know what the enhancement
bonus of a noncursed magic item is, she shouldn’t immediately
know that a weapon is cursed. Once she knows, however, the item
can be discarded unless some sort of compulsion is placed upon it
that compels the wielder to keep and use it. In such cases, a remove
cursespell is generally needed to get rid of the item.
Intermittent Functioning: The three varieties of intermit-
tent functioning items all function perfectly as described—at
least some of the time. The three varieties are unreliable, depend-
ent, and uncontrolled items.
Unreliable: Each time the item is activated, there is a 5% chance
(01–05 on d%) that it does not function. At the DM’s option, the
failure chance can be altered to be anything from 1% to 10%, de-
pending on the item and the campaign.
Dependent: The item only functions in certain situations. To
determine what the situation is, either select a situation or roll on
the following table.
d%Situation
01–03Temperature below freezing
04–05Temperature above freezing
06–10During the day
11–15During the night
16–20In direct sunlight
21–25Out of direct sunlight
26–34Underwater
35–37Out of water
38–45Underground
46–55Aboveground
56–60Within 10 feet of a random creature type
61–64Within 10 feet of a random race or kind of creature
65–72Within 10 feet of an arcane spellcaster
73–80Within 10 feet of a divine spellcaster
81–85In the hands of a nonspellcaster
86–90In the hands of a spellcaster
91–95In the hands of a creature of a particular alignment
96In the hands of a creature of particular gender
97–99On nonholy days or during particular astrological events
100More than 100 miles from a particular site
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS