250
Boots of Elvenkind:These soft boots enable the wearer to
move quietly in virtually any surroundings, granting a +5 compe-
tence bonus on Move Silently checks.
Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, creator
must be an elf; Price 2,500 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Boots of Levitation:On command, these leather boots allow
the wearer to levitate as if she had cast levitateon herself.
Faint transmutation; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, levitate;
Price 7,500 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Boots of Speed:As a free action, the wearer can click her boot
heels together, enabling her to act as though affected by a haste
spell for up to 10 rounds each day. The duration of the hasteeffect
need not be consecutive rounds.
Moderate transmutation; CL 10th; Craft Wondrous Item, haste;
Price 12,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Boots of Striding and Springing:These boots increase the
wearer’s base land speed by 10 feet. In addition to this striding
ability (considered an enhancement bonus), these boots allow the
wearer to make great leaps. She can jump with a +5 competence
bonus on Jump checks.
Faint transmutation; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, longstrider,
creator must have 5 ranks in the Jump skill; Price 5,500 gp;
Weight 1 lb.
Boots of Teleportation:Any character wearing this footwear
may teleportthree times per day, exactly as if he had cast the spell
of the same name.
Moderate conjuration; CL 9th; Craft Wondrous Item, teleport;
Price 49,000 gp; Weight 3 lb.
Boots of the Winterlands:This footgear bestows many
powers upon the wearer. First, he is able to travel across snow at
his normal speed, leaving no tracks. The boots also enable him to
travel at normal speed across the most slippery ice (horizontal
surfaces only, not vertical or sharply slanted ones) without falling
or slipping. Finally, boots of the winterlandswarm the wearer, as if
he were affected by an endure elements spell.
Faint abjuration and transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous
Item, cat ’s grace, endure elements, pass without trace; Price 2,500 gp;
Weight 1 lb.
Boots, Winged:These boots appear to be ordinary footgear.
On command, the boots sprout wings at the heel and let the
wearer fly, without having to maintain concentration, as if
affected by a flyspell. He can fly three times day for up to 5 min-
utes per flight.
Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, fly; Price
16,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Bottle of Air:This item appears to be a normal glass bottle
with a cork. When taken to any airless environment (such as
underwater or in a vacuum), it retains air within it at all times,
continually renewing its contents. This means that a character
can draw air out of the bottle to breathe. The bottle can even be
shared by multiple characters who pass it around. Breathing out
of the bottle is a standard action, but a character so doing can then
act for as long as she can hold her breath.
Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous Item, water
breathing; Price 7,250 gp; Weight 2 lb.
Bowl of Commanding Water Elementals:This large con-
tainer is usually fashioned from blue or green semiprecious stone
(malachite, lapis lazuli, azurite, turquoise, peridot, or sometimes
jade). It is about 1 foot in diameter, half that deep, and relatively
fragile. When the bowl is filled with fresh water, and certain
words are spoken, a Large water elemental appears. The summon-
ing words require 1 full round to speak. In all ways the bowl func-
tions as the summon monster VIspell. Only one elemental can be
called at a time. A new elemental requires the bowl to be filled
with new water, which cannot happen until after the first ele-
mental disappears (is dispelled, dismissed, or slain).
If salt water is used, the elemental is Huge rather than Large (as
if summon monster VIIhad been cast). See page 98 of the Monster
Manualfor details on water elementals.
Strong conjuration; CL 13th; Craft Wondrous Item, summon
monster VI, summon monster VII; Price 100,000 gp; Weight 3 lb.
Bracelet of Friends:This silver charm bracelet has four
charms upon it when created. The owner may designate one
person known to him to be keyed to one charm. (This designation
takes a standard action, but once done it lasts forever or until
changed.) When a charm is grasped and the name of the keyed
individual is spoken, that person is called to the spot (a standard
action) along with his or her gear, as long as the owner and the
called person are on the same plane. The keyed individual knows
who is calling, and the bracelet of friends only functions on willing
travelers. Once a charm is activated, it disappears. Charms sepa-
rated from the bracelet are worthless. A bracelet found with fewer
than four charms is worth 25% less for each missing charm.
Strong conjuration; CL 15th; Craft Wondrous Item, refuge; Price
19,000 gp.
Bracers of Archery, Greater:These wristbands look like
normal protective wear. The bracers empower the wearer to use
any bow (not including crossbows) as if she were proficient in its
use. If she already has proficiency with any type of bow, she gains
a +2 competence bonus on attack rolls and a +1 competence bonus
on damage rolls whenever using that type of bow. Both bracers
must be worn for the magic to be effective.
Moderate transmutation; CL 8th; Craft Wondrous Item, Craft
Magic Arms and Armor; Price 25,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Bracers of Archery, Lesser:These wristbands function as
greater bracers of archery, except that they grant a +1 competence
bonus on attack rolls and no bonus on damage rolls.
Faint transmutation; CL 4th; Craft Wondrous Item, Craft Magic
Arms and Armor; Price 5,000 gp; Weight 1 lb.
Bracers of Armor:These items appear to be wrist or arm
guards. They surround the wearer with an invisible but tangible
field of force, granting him an armor bonus of +1 to +8, just as
though he were wearing armor. Both bracers must be worn for the
magic to be effective.
Moderate conjuration; CL 7th; Craft Wondrous Item, mage
armor, creator’s caster level must be at least two times that of the
bonus placed in the bracers; Price 1,000 gp (+1), 4,000 gp (+2),
9,000 gp (+3), 16,000 gp (+4), 25,000 gp (+5), 36,000 gp (+6), 49,000
gp (+7), 64,000 gp (+8); Weight 1 lb.
Brazier of Commanding Fire Elementals:This device
appears to be a normal container for holding burning coals. When
a fire is lit in the brazier and the proper summoning words are
spoken, a Large fire elemental appears. The summoning words
require 1 full round to speak. In all ways the brazier functions as
the summon monster VIspell. If brimstone is added, the elemental
is Huge instead of Large, and the brazier works as a summon mon-
ster VII spell. Only one elemental can be summoned at a time. A
new elemental requires a new fire, which cannot be lit until after
the first elemental disappears (is dispelled, dismissed, or slain).
See page 98 of the Monster Manualfor details on fire elementals.
Strong conjuration; CL 13th; Craft Wondrous Item, summon
monster VI, summon monster VII; Price 100,000 gp; Weight 5 lb.
Brooch of Shielding:This appears to be a piece of silver or
gold jewelry used to fasten a cloak or cape. In addition to this
mundane task, it can absorb magic missilesof the sort generated by
spell or spell-like ability. A brooch can absorb up to 101 points of
damage from magic missilesbefore it melts and becomes useless.
Faint abjuration; CL 1st; Craft Wondrous Item, shield; Price
1,500 gp.
Broom of Flying:This broom is able to fly through the air as if
affected by an overland flightspell (average maneuverability) for up
to 9 hours per day (split up as its owner desires). The broom can
carry 200 pounds and fly at a speed of 40 feet, or up to 400 pounds
at a speed at 30 feet. In addition, the broom can travel alone to any
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS