First Impression: Fancy buildings in wildly
clashing architectural styles dominate the street, each
trying to outdo the other in ostentatiousness. Most
such buildings feature coats of arms and flags identify-
ing the nations they represent.
Social Class:Upper class.
Finance District
Banks and merchant-houses tend to congregate here
because much of their business is with each other.
Buildings:Banks (2), moneychangers (7), temple
(Fharlanghn,  upscale  food  (10),  exotic  trades  (5),
upscale trades (25), upscale residences (20).
First Impression: The city watch is augmented
by private guards, making this a particularly well-pro-
tected district, day or night.
Social Class:Upper class.
Fine Shops
Shopping districts such as this one often feature store-
fronts of interest to adventurers. The city’s best armor-
ers, weaponsmiths, sages, and magic-dealers offer their
services here.
Buildings:Upscale lodging (4), upscale food (6),
exotic trades (10), upscale trades (30), upscale resi-
dences (20).
First Impression: The hubbub of commerce is
omnipresent here, but the high prices discourage the
crowds found in less tony shopping districts. 
Social Class:Upper class.
Lord’s Keep
A fortress, usually the castle where the city’s ruler lives,
dominates this district.
Buildings:Manor house, servants’ quarters (2),
garrison post, chapel (Kord, Heironeous, or St. Cuth-
bert), average trades (15).
First Impression: Pennants in the city’s colors
flutter over the castle, and guards eye the street from
their watchtowers above. Soldiers drill in the courtyard
beyond the open drawbridge.
Social Class:Upper class.
Lord’s Keep, Vacant
This district is similar to the one above, except that no
one is living in the fortress. Perhaps the lord is on a cru-
sade, or maybe a more mysterious fate has befallen the
city’s ruler.
Buildings:Manor house, servants’ quarters (2),
garrison post, chapel (Heironeous, Kord, or St. Cuth-
bert), average trades (15).
First Impression: This once-proud castle is
beginning to show signs of neglect, though it is still an
imposing fortress.
Social Class:Middle class.
Magic District
Many cities segregate users of magic into their own ward
to protect the rest of the city from errant spellcasting. Such
an arrangement also helps the rulers and constabulary
keep an eye on some of the city’s most powerful residents.
Buildings:Magic item dealers (2), spellcasters for
hire (6), temple (Boccob), shrine, upscale food (5),
exotic trades (10), upscale trades (15), upscale services
(10), upscale residences (20).
First Impression: Continual flames illuminate
the streets, and entertaining, artistic illusions decorate
some of the buildings. The berobed citizens frequently
display flashy magic—typically glamers. Useful magic
items abound.
Social Class:Upper class.
Noble Estates
The wealthy, highborn residents of the city live in
splendor in the manors of this district.
Buildings:Estates (30).
First Impression: This district is quieter and
cleaner than the rest of the city. Servants scurry about
on their errands, and nobles travel by carriage to call on
their genteel counterparts.
Social Class:Upper class.
Park District
For those who love the outdoors, this district provides a
respite from the hustle and bustle of the city.
Buildings:Parks (1 large or 3 small), temple
(Corellon Larethian, Ehlonna, or Obad-Hai), druidic
site, upscale taverns (5), exotic trades (5), upscale trades
(8), upscale services (17), upscale residences (30).
First Impression: Clusters of trees, landscaped
flowerbeds, and lawns of trimmed grass dominate the
landscape. The air smells fresher here than it does else-
where in the city.
Social Class:Upper class.
University
The colleges in this district teach everything from
Knowledge and Profession skills to the secrets of
divine and arcane magic. Adventurers can find esoteric
lore and answers to obscure riddles here.
Buildings:University  buildings,  including
instruction and faculty offices) (4), library, temple
4