138
a simple nearby danger) held by a monstrous being or beings
not native to the community.
Nonstandard:While the community may have a mayor or a
town council, the real power lies in other hands. It may center on
a guild—a formal organization of merchants, craftsmen, profes-
sionals, thieves, assassins, or warriors who collectively wield great
influence. An aristocracy, in the form of one or more rich individ-
uals with no political office, may exert influence through wealth.
A prestigious aristocracy, such as a group of accomplished adven-
turers, may exert influence through their reputation and experi-
ence. Wise elders may exert influence over those who respect
their age, reputation, and perceived wisdom.
Magical:This type of power center can take the form of a
temple full of priests or a single sorcerer cloistered in a tower. A
wizard or cleric might be the actual, official ruler of the town, or
she may just be someone with a great deal of influence.
Alignment of Power Centers
The alignment of the ruler or rulers of a community need not con-
form to the alignment of all or even the majority of the residents,
although this is usually the case. In any case, the alignment of the
power center strongly shapes the residents’ daily lives. Due to
their generally organized and organizing nature, most power cen-
ters are lawful.
To randomly determine the alignment of a power center, roll
d% and refer to the table below. How a power center of a given
alignment acts, or how it is perceived by the community, is dis-
cussed following the table.
Power Center Alignment
d%Alignmentd%Alignment
01–35Lawful good64Chaotic neutral
36–39Neutral good65–90Lawful evil
40–41Chaotic good91–98Neutral evil
42–61Lawful neutral99–100Chaotic evil
62–63True neutral
Lawful Good:A community with a lawful good power center
usually has a codified set of laws, and most people willingly obey
those laws.
Neutral Good: A neutral good power center rarely influences
the residents of the community other than to help them when
they are in need.
Chaotic Good:This sort of power center influences the
community by helping the needy and opposing restrictions on
freedom.
Lawful Neutral:A community with a lawful neutral power
center has a codified set of laws that are followed to the letter.
Those in power usually insist that visitors (as well as residents)
obey all local rules and regulations.
True Neutral: This sort of power center rarely influences the
community. Those in power prefer to pursue their private goals.
Chaotic Neutral:This sort of power center is unpredictable,
influencing the community in different ways at different times.
Lawful Evil:A community with a lawful evil power center us-
ually has a codified set of laws, which most people obey out of fear
of harsh punishment.
Neutral Evil:The residents of a community with a neutral evil
power center are usually oppressed and subjugated, facing a dire
future.
Chaotic Evil:The residents of a community with a chaotic evil
power center live in abject fear because of the unpredictable and
horrific situations continually placed upon them.
Conflicting Power Centers
If a community has more than one power center, and two or more
of the power centers have opposing alignments (either good vs.
evil or law vs. chaos), they conflict in some way. Such conflict is
not always open, and sometimes the conflicting power centers
grudgingly get along.
For example, a small city contains a powerful chaotic good wiz-
ards’ guild but is ruled by a lawful good aristocrat. The wizards are
sometimes exasperated by the strict laws imposed by the aristocrat
ruler and occasionally break or circumvent them when it serves
their (well-intentioned) purposes. Most of the time, though, a rep-
resentative from the guild takes their concerns and disagreements
to the aristocrat, who attempts to equitably resolve any problems.
Another example: A large city contains a powerful lawful evil
fighter, a lawful good temple, and a chaotic evil aristocrat. The self-
ish aristocrat is concerned only with his own gain and his de-
bauched desires. The fighter gathers a small legion of warriors,
hoping to oust the aristocrat and take control of the city herself.
Meanwhile, the clerics of the powerful temple help the citizenry
as well as they can, never directly confronting the aristocrat but
aiding and abetting those who suffer at his hands.
Community Authorities
It’s often important to know who makes up the community’s
authority structure. The authority structure does not necessarily
indicate  who’s  in  charge,  but  instead  who  keeps  order  and
enforces the authority that exists.
Constable/Captain of the Guard/Sheriff: This position gen-
erally devolves upon the highest-level warrior in a community, or
one of the highest-level fighters. To randomly determine the class
and level of a community’s constable, roll d% and refer to the fol-
lowing table.
d%Officeholder
01–60Highest-level warrior
61–80Second highest-level fighter
81–100Highest-level fighter
Use the tables in the next section to determine the constable’s level.
Guards/Soldiers:For every 100 people in the community
(round down), the community has one full-time guard or soldier.
In addition, for every 20 people in the community, an able-bodied
member of the local militia or a conscript soldier can be brought
into service within just a few hours.
Other NPCs in the Community
For detailed city play, knowing exactly who lives in the commu-
nity becomes important. The following guidelines allow you to
determine the levels of the most powerful locals and then extrap-
olate from that to determine the rest of the classed characters
living there.
Highest-Level NPC in the Community for Each Class: Use
the following tables to determine the highest-level character in a
given class for a given community. Determine the appropriate
community modifier by consulting the first table below; then
refer to the second table, roll the dice indicated for the class, and
apply the modifier to get a result.
A result of 0 or lower for character level means that no charac-
ters of that kind can be found in the community. The maximum
level for any class is 20th.
Total Characters of Each Class
Use the following method for determining the levels of all the
characters in a community of any given class.
For PC classes, if the highest-level character indicated is 2nd
level or higher, assume the community has twice that number of
characters of half that level. If those characters are higher than 1st
level, assume that for each such character, the community has two
of half that level. Continue until the number of 1st-level charac-
ters is generated. For example, if the highest-level fighter is 5th
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS