But the PCs aren’t alone in the serene haze of the Astral
Plane. Githyanki pirates cruise the color pools, looking for
well-heeled travelers from other planes. A typical githyanki
pirate ship is a longship (described on page 132 of the Player ’s
Handbook) that flies under its own power at a speed of 90 feet.
The pirate captain (githyanki Ftr11 or Ftr6/Rog5) leads his
crew into battle, with a war-wizard (githyanki Wiz9) or merce-
nary cleric (tiefling Clr9) providing support to the rank-and-
file pirates. (Githyanki are never clerics themselves, so they
must hire mercenary clerics because natural healing doesn’t
work on the Astral Plane.)
The githyanki use the enhanced magic of the Astral Plane to
good effect, taking full attacks, then using their dimension door
spell-like ability as a free action to confound their enemies.
ELEMENTAL PLANE OF AIR
The Elemental Plane of Air is an empty plane, consisting of sky
above and sky below. Clouds billow up in bank after bank,
swelling into grand thunderheads and dissipating into wisps like
cotton candy. The wind pulls and tugs around travelers, and rain-
bows glimmer in the distance.
The Elemental Plane of Air is the most comfortable and surviv-
able of the Inner Planes, and it is the home of all manner of air-
borne creatures. Indeed, flying creatures find themselves at a great
advantage on this plane. While travelers without flight can sur-
vive easily here, they are at a disadvantage.
The Elemental Plane of Air has the following traits.
•Subjective  directional  gravity.  Inhabitants  of  the  plane  deter-
mine their own “down” direction. Objects not under the motive
force of others do not move.
•Air-dominant.
•Enhanced  magic.  Spells  and  spell-like  abilities  that  use,  ma-
nipulate,  or  create  air  (including  spells  of  the  Air  domain)  are
both  empowered  and  enlarged  (as  if  the  Empower  Spell  and
Enlarge Spell metamagic feats had been used on them, but the
spells don’t require higher-level slots).
•Impeded magic. Spells and spell-like abilities that use or create
earth  (including  spells  of  the  Earth  domain  and  spells  that
summon earth elementals or outsiders with the earth subtype)
are impeded.
Example Plane of Air Site: Cloud Island
What appears to be a white cumulus cloud is actually as solid as
earth, if somewhat difficult to move across (treat as a shallow bog;
see page 88). Creatures with a fly speed can force themselves
through the cloud island (effectively giving them a burrow speed
of 10 feet). Some 2d4 pillars of fog 10 feet across drift across the
landscape (they provide concealment as the obscuring mistspell,
moving 10 feet in a random direction at initiative count 0). The
cloud island is about 1/2 mile wide and 1d10×5 feet thick at any
given point.
Elemental Plane of Air Encounters (EL 10)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–121d4+2 noble djinn (genie)12
21–321 elder air elemental11
33–471d3 elder arrowhawks10
48–621d4+2 belkers 10
63–741 greater air elemental9
75–841d4+2 adult arrowhawks9
85–921 invisible stalker7
93–1001 Huge air elemental7
Floating in serene contemplation in the center of the cloud
island is a noble djinn (see page 115 of the Monster Manual). If char-
acters capture her (by defeating her without killing her or driving
her away), she will grant three wishescollectively to the party. She is
eager to talk to visitors from the Material Plane, where she spent
more than a century trapped by an evil wizard. If characters can
improve her attitude to friendly (it starts out indifferent), she’ll offer
the characters a bargain. She will grant three wishesto the party if
the characters will first avenge her imprisonment by capturing the
evil Material Plane conjurer and returning him to this cloud island,
where the djinn will arrange for “long-term detention.”
ELEMENTAL PLANE OF EARTH
The Elemental Plane of Earth is a solid place made of rock, soil,
and stone. An unwary and unprepared traveler may find himself
entombed within this vast solidity of material and have his life
crushed into nothingness, his powdered remains a warning to any
foolish enough to follow.
Despite its solid, unyielding nature, the Elemental Plane of
Earth is varied in its consistency, ranging from relatively soft soil
to veins of heavier and more valuable metal. Striations of granite,
volcanic rock, and marble interweave with brittle crystal and soft,
crumbling chalks and sandstones. Thin veins of gemstones, rough
and huge, can be found within the plane, and these unpolished
jewels often lead the greedy to this plane in the hope of picking
them up with minimal effort. Such prospectors often meet their
match in the natives of the Elemental Plane of Earth, who feel
extremely attached (sometimes literally) to parts of their home.
The Elemental Plane of Earth has the following traits.
•Earth-dominant.
•Enhanced  magic.  Spells  and  spell-like  abilities  that  use,  ma-
nipulate, or create earth or stone (including those of the Earth
domain)   are   both   empowered   and   extended   (as   if   the
Empower  Spell  and  Extend  Spell  metamagic  feats  had  been
used  on  them,  but  the  spells  don’t  require  higher-level  slots).
Spells  and  spell-like  abilities  that  are  already  empowered  or
extended are unaffected by this benefit.
•Impeded magic. Spells and spell-like abilities that use or create
air (including spells of the Air domain and spells that summon
air elementals or outsiders with the air subtype) are impeded.
Example Plane of Earth Site:  Great Dismal Delve
Essentially a dungeon the size of a continent, the Great Dismal
Delve is a maddening maze of passages that are intentionally be-
wildering to the traveler. A variety of powerful genie lords and
their slave races live here in dark splendor, eagerly mining gems
for trade. Slaves, often the losers in bets and bargains with the
rulers of the Great Dismal Delve, build and rebuild passages, fend
off elemental attacks, and are otherwise slowly worked to death by
their uncaring masters.
Glowing crystals line the Great Dismal Delve, and great vaults
are set with them in star patterns unlike any seen on the Material
Plane. The Great Dismal Delve spans a number of large, natural
caverns that are tectonically unstable. Earthquakes (with an effect
as the spell; see page 225 of the Player ’s Handbook) are frequent
occurrences, which keeps the slaves busy doing repair work.
The connections and passages of the Great Dismal Delve
link up with a complicated array of portals leading to other
Inner Planes, the subterranean reaches of some of the Outer
Planes, and the deepest dungeons of the Material Plane. It is
rumored that somewhere within the Great Dismal Delve is a
freestanding portal to almost every secret location within the
D&D cosmology.
Elemental Plane of Earth Encounters (EL 10)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–251 elder earth elemental11
26–501d4+2 average xorns10
51–751d3 elder xorns10
76–901 greater earth elemental9
91–1001 Huge earth elemental7
155
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS