DESERT TERRAIN
Desert terrain exists in warm, temperate, and cold climates, but all
deserts share one common trait: little rain. The three categories of
desert terrain are tundra (cold deserts), rocky desert (often tem-
perate), and sandy desert (often warm).
Desert Terrain Features
——— Desert Category ———
TundraRockySandy
Light undergrowth15%5%5%
Ice sheet25%——
Light rubble5%30%10%
Dense rubble—30%5%
Sand dunes——50%
Sample Warm Desert Encounter Table (EL 7)
d%EncounterAverage EL
01–071 androsphinx9
08–151 gynosphinx8
16–231d3 lamias8
24–311d3 basilisks7
32–411 criosphinx7
42–495th-level human monk NPC 7
and 5th-level human bard NPC
50–571 flesh golem7
58–691d3 hieracosphinxes7
70–801 Huge monstrous scorpion (vermin)7
81–881d3 jann (genie)6
89–961d4+2 Large monstrous scorpions (vermin)6
97–1001 mummy5
Tundra differs from the other desert categories in two impor-
tant ways. Because snow and ice cover much of the landscape, it’s
easy to find water. And during the height of summer, the per-
mafrost thaws to a depth of a foot or so, turning the landscape into
a vast field of mud. The muddy tundra affects movement and skill
use as the shallow bogs described in marsh terrain, although
there’s little standing water.
The table above describes terrain elements found in each of the
three desert categories. The percentages are intended to guide
your map-drawing; don’t roll for each square. The terrain ele-
ments on this table are mutually exclusive; for instance, a square
of tundra may contain either light undergrowth or an ice sheet,
but not both.
Light Undergrowth: Consisting of scrubby, hardy bushes
and cacti, light undergrowth functions as described for other ter-
rain types.
Ice Sheet: The ground is covered with slippery ice. It costs 2
squares of movement to enter a square covered by an ice sheet, and
the DC of Balance and Tumble checks there increases by 5. A DC
10 Balance check is required to run or charge across an ice sheet.
Light Rubble: Small rocks are strewn across the ground,
making nimble movement more difficult more difficult. The DC
of Balance and Tumble checks increases by 2.
Dense Rubble: This terrain feature consists of more and larger
stones. It costs 2 squares of movement to enter a square with dense
rubble. The DC of Balance and Tumble checks increases by 5, and
the DC of Move Silently checks increases by 2.
Sand Dunes: Created by the action of wind on sand, sand
dunes function as hills that move. If the wind is strong and con-
sistent, a sand dune can move several hundred feet in a week’s
time. Sand dunes can cover hundreds of squares. They always have
a gentle slope pointing in the direction of the prevailing wind and
a steep slope on the leeward side.
Other Desert Terrain Features: Tundra is sometimes bor-
dered by forests, and the occasional tree isn’t out of place in the
cold wastes. Rocky deserts have towers and mesas consisting of
flat ground surrounded on all sides by cliffs and steep slopes (de-
scribed in Mountain Terrain, above). Sandy deserts sometimes
have quicksand; this functions as described in Marsh Terrain,
above, although desert quicksand is a waterless mixture of fine
sand  and  dust.  All  desert  terrain  is  crisscrossed  with  dry
streambeds (treat as trenches 5 to 15 feet wide) that fill with water
on the rare occasions when rain falls.
Stealth and Detection in the Desert: In general, the maxi-
mum distance in desert terrain at which a Spot check for detect-
ing the nearby presence of others can succeed is 6d6×20 feet;
beyond this distance, elevation changes and heat distortion in
warm deserts makes spotting impossible. The presence of dunes
in sandy deserts limits spotting distance to 6d6×10 feet.
The desert imposes neither bonuses nor penalties on Listen or
Spot checks. The scarcity of undergrowth or other elements that
offer concealment or cover makes hiding more difficult.
Sandstorms
A sandstorm reduces visibility to 1d10×5 feet and provides a –4
penalty on Listen, Search, and Spot checks. A sandstorm deals 1d3
points of nonlethal damage per hour to any creatures caught in
the open, and leaves a thin coating of sand in its wake. Driving
sand creeps in through all but the most secure seals and seams, to
chafe skin and contaminate carried gear.
PLAINS TERRAIN
Plains are where most civilizations flourish, so they are often set-
tled. Plains come in three categories: farms, grasslands, and battle-
fields. Farms are common in settled areas, of course, while grass-
lands represent untamed plains. The battlefields where large
armies clash are temporary places, usually reclaimed by natural
vegetation or the farmer’s plow. Battlefields represent a third ter-
rain category because adventurers tend to spend a lot of time
there, not because they’re particularly prevalent.
The table below shows the proportions of terrain elements in
the different categories of plains. On a farm, light undergrowth
represents most mature grain crops, so farms growing vegetable
crops will have less light undergrowth, as will all farms during the
time between harvest and a few months after planting.
The terrain elements in the table below are mutually exclusive.
Plains Terrain Features
——— Plains Category ———
FarmGrasslandBattlefield
Light undergrowth40%20%10%
Heavy undergrowth—10%—
Light rubble——10%
Trench5%—5%
Berm——5%
Undergrowth: Whether they’re crops or natural vegetation,
the tall grasses of the plains function like light undergrowth in a
forest. Particularly thick bushes form patches of heavy under-
growth that dot the landscape in grasslands.
Light Rubble: On the battlefield, light rubble usually repre-
sents something that was destroyed: the ruins of a building or the
scattered remnants of a stone wall, for example. It functions as
described in the desert terrain section above.
Trench: Often dug before a battle to protect soldiers, a trench
functions as a low wall, except that it provides no cover against
adjacent foes. It costs 2 squares of movement to leave a trench, but
it costs nothing extra to enter one. Creatures outside a trench who
make a melee attack against a creature inside the trench gain a +1
bonus on melee attacks because they have higher ground.
In farm terrain, trenches are generally irrigation ditches.
Berm: A common defensive structure, a berm is a low, earthen
wall that slows movement and provides a measure of cover. Put a
91
CHAPTER 3:
ADVENTURES