Enemy Detection:This device pulses in the wielder’s hand
and points in the direction of any creature or creatures hostile to
the bearer of the device (nearest ones first). These creatures can be
invisible, ethereal, hidden, disguised, or in plain sight. Detection
range is 60 feet. If the bearer of the rod concentrates for a full
round, the rod pinpoints the location of the nearest enemy and
indicates how many enemies are within range. The rod can be
used three times each day, each use lasting up to 10 minutes. Acti-
vating  the  rod  is  a  standard
action.
Moderate  divination;  CL
10th; Craft Rod, true seeing; Price
23,500 gp.
Flailing:Upon the command of
its possessor, the rod activates, changing
from a normal-seeming rod to a +3 dire
flail. The dire flail is a double weapon, which
means that each of the weapon’s heads can be
used to attack (see the weapon description on
page 117 of the Player ’s Handbook). The wielder can
gain an extra attack (with the second head) at the cost
of making all attacks at a –2 penalty (as if she had the
Two-Weapon Fighting feat).
Once per day the wielder can use a free action to cause
the rod to grant her a +4 deflection bonus to Armor Class
and a +4 resistance bonus on saving throws for 10 minutes.
The rod need not be in weapon form to grant this bene-
fit. Transforming it into a weapon or back into a rod is a
move action.
Moderate enchantment; CL 9th; Craft Rod, Craft
Magic Arms and Armor, bless; Price 50,000 gp.
Flame Extinguishing: This rod can extinguish Medium
or smaller nonmagical fires with simply a touch (a stan-
dard action). For the rod to be effective against other
sorts of fires, the wielder must expend 1 or more of
the rod’s charges.
Extinguishing a Large or larger nonmagical
fire, or a magic fire of Medium or smaller
(such as that of a flaming weapon or a burn-
ing handsspell), expends 1 charge. Con-
tinual magic flames, such as those of a
weapon or a fire creature, are sup-
pressed for 6 rounds and flare up
again after that time. To extinguish an instantaneous fire spell, the
rod must be within the area of the effect and the wielder must
have used a ready action, effectively countering the entire spell.
When applied to Large or larger magic fires, such as those
caused by fireball, flame strike,or wall of fire, extinguishing the
flames expends 2 charges from the rod.
If the device is used upon a fire creature (a melee touch attack),
it deals 6d6 points of damage to the creature. This use requires 3
charges.
A rod of flame extinguishinghas 10 charges when found. Spent
charges are renewed every day, so that a wielder can expend up to
10 charges in any 24-hour period.
Strong transmutation; CL 12th; Craft Rod, pyrotechnics; Price
15,000 gp.
Immovable Rod:This rod is a flat iron bar with a small button
on one end. When the button is pushed (a move action), the rod
does not move from where it is, even if staying in place defies grav-
ity. Thus, the owner can lift or place the rod wherever he wishes,
push the button, and let go. Adventurers have found the immov-
able roduseful for holding ropes, barring doors, and all sorts of
other utilitarian tasks. Many adventurers have found it useful to
have more than one. Several immovable rodscan even make a
ladder when used together (although only two are needed). An
immovable rodcan support up to 8,000 pounds before falling to the
ground. If a creature pushes against an immovable rod,it must make
a DC_30 Strength check to move the rod up to 10 feet in a single
round.
Moderate transmutation; CL 10th; Craft Rod, levitate; Price
5,000 gp.
Lordly Might:This rod has functions that are spell-like,
and it can also be used as a magic weapon of various
sorts. It also has several more mundane uses. The
rod of lordly mightis metal, thicker than other
rods, with a flanged ball at one end and six
studlike buttons along its length. (Pushing
any of the rod’s buttons is equivalent to
drawing a weapon.) It weighs 10 pounds.
The following spell-like functions of the rod
can each be used once per day.
•Hold personupon touch, if the wielder
so commands (Will DC 14 negates). The
wielder  must  choose  to  use  this  power  and
then  succeed  on  a  melee  touch  attack  to  activate
the power. If the attack fails, the effect is lost.
•Fearupon all enemies viewing it, if the wielder so
desires   (10-foot   maximum   range,   Will   DC   16
partial). Invoking this power is a standard action.
•Deal 2d4 hit points of damage to an opponent on
a  successful  touch  attack  (Will  DC  17
half )   and   cure   the   wielder   of   a   like
amount of damage. The wielder
must choose to use this power
before  attacking,  as  with  hold
person.
The following weapon func-
tions of the rod have no limit on the
number of times they can be employed.
•In its normal form, the rod can be used as
a +2 light mace.
•When  button  1  is  pushed,  the  rod
becomes  a  +1  flaming  longsword.A  blade
springs  from  the  ball,  with  the  ball  itself
becoming  the  sword’s  hilt.  The  weapon  lengthens  to  an
overall length of 4 feet.
•When button 2 is pushed, the rod becomes a +4 battleaxe.A
wide blade springs forth at the ball, and the whole lengthens
to 4 feet.
•When button 3 is pushed, the rod becomes a +3 shortspear
or +3 longspear.The spear blade springs forth, and the handle
can be lengthened up to 12 feet (wielder’s choice), for an
overall length of from 6 feet to 15 feet. At
its  15-foot  length,  the  rod  is  suitable  for
use as a lance.
The following other functions of the rod also
have no limit on the number of times they can be employed.
•Climbing pole/ladder. When button 4 is pushed, a spike that
can  anchor  in  granite  is  extruded  from  the  ball,  while  the
other  end  sprouts  three  sharp  hooks.  The  rod  lengthens  to
anywhere  between  5  and  50  feet  in  a  single  round,  stopping
when  button  4  is  pushed  again.  Horizontal  bars  three  inches
long fold out from the sides, 1 foot apart, in staggered progres-
sion.  The  rod  is  firmly  held  by  the  spike  and  hooks  and  can
bear  up  to  4,000  pounds.  The  wielder  can  retract  the  pole  by
pushing button 5.
•The ladder  function  can  be  used  to  force  open  doors.  The
wielder plants the rod’s base 30 feet or less from the portal to be
forced  and  in  line  with  it,  then  pushes  button  4.  The  force
exerted has a Strength modifier of +12.
•When button 6 is pushed, the rod indicates magnetic north and
gives  the  wielder  a  knowledge  of  his  approximate  depth  be-
neath the surface or height above it.
235
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Using multiple
immovable rods