258
secret doors, traps, and similar concealed objects. Both lenses
must be worn for the magic to be effective.
Faint divination; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, true seeing; Price
1,250 gp.
Goggles of Night: The lenses of this item are made of dark
crystal. Even though the lenses are opaque, when placed over the
eyes of the wearer they enable him to see normally and also grant
him 60-foot darkvision. Both lenses must be worn for the magic to
be effective.
Faint transmutation; CL 3rd; Craft Wondrous Item, darkvision;
Price 12,000 gp.
Golem Manual: A golem manualcontains information, incanta-
tions and magical power that help a character to craft a golem (see
page 134 of the Monster Manual). The instructions therein grant a
+5 competence bonus on skill checks made to craft the golem’s
body. Each manual also holds the prerequisite spells needed for a
specific golem, effectively grants the builder use of the Craft Con-
struct feat (see page 303 of the Monster Manual) during the con-
struction of the golem, and grants the character an increase to her
caster level for the purpose of crafting a golem. Any golem built
using a golem manualdoes not cost the creator any XP, since the
requisite XP are “contained” in the book and “expended” by the
book during the creation process.
The spells included in a golem manualrequire a spell trigger acti-
vation and can be activated only to assist in the construction of a
golem. The cost of the book does not include the cost of con-
structing the golem’s body. Once the golem is finished, the writing
in the manual fades and the book is consumed in flames. When
the book’s ashes are sprinkled upon the golem, it becomes fully
animated.
Clay Golem Manual:The book contains animate objects, bless,
commune, prayer, and resurrection. The reader may treat her caster
level as two levels higher than normal for the purpose of crafting
a clay golem. The book supplies 1,540 XP for the creation of a clay
golem.
Moderate conjuration, divination, enchantment, and transmu-
tation; CL 11th; Craft Construct, creator must be caster level 11th,
animate objects, commune, prayer, resurrection; Price 12,000 gp; Cost
2,150 gp + 1,712 XP; Weight 5 lb.
Flesh Golem Manual:The book contains animate dead, bull’s
strength, geas/quest, andlimited wish. The reader may treat her caster
level as one level higher than normal for the purpose of crafting a
flesh golem. The book supplies 780 XP for the creation of a flesh
golem.
Moderate enchantment, necromancy [evil], and transmutation;
CL 8th; Craft Construct, creator must be caster level 8th, animate
dead, bull’s strength, geas/quest, limited wish; Price 8,000 gp; Cost
2,050 gp + 944 XP; Weight 5 lb.
Iron Golem Manual:The book contains cloudkill, geas/quest, lim-
ited wish, and polymorph any object. The reader may treat her caster
level as four levels higher than normal for the purpose of crafting
a iron golem. The book supplies 5,600 XP for the creation of a iron
golem.
Strong conjuration, enchantment and transmutation; CL 16th;
Craft Construct, creator must be caster level 16th, cloudkill,
geas/quest, limited wish, polymorph any object; Price 35,000 gp; Cost
3,500 gp + 5,880 XP; Weight 5 lb.
Stone Golem Manual:The book contains geas/quest, limited wish,
polymorph any object, and slow. The reader may treat her caster level
as three levels higher than normal for the purpose of crafting a
stone golem. The book supplies 3,400 XP for the creation of a
stone golem.
Strong abjuration and enchantment; CL 14th; Craft Construct,
creator must be caster level 14th, antimagic field, geas/quest, symbol of
stunning; Price 22,000 gp; Cost 2,500 gp + 3,600 XP; Weight 5 lb.
Stone Golem Manual, Greater:The book contains geas/quest, lim-
ited wish, polymorph any object, and slow. The reader may treat her
caster level as three levels higher than normal for the purpose of
crafting a stone golem. The book supplies 7,640 XP for the cre-
ation of a greater stone golem.
Strong abjuration and enchantment; CL 16th; Craft Construct,
creator must be caster level 16th, antimagic field, geas/quest, symbol of
stunning; Price 44,000 gp; Cost 2,900 gp + 7,872 XP; Weight 5 lb.
Hand of Glory:This mummified human hand hangs by a
leather cord around a character’s neck (taking up space as a magic
necklace would). If a magic ring is placed on one of the fingers of
the hand, the wearer benefits from the ring as if wearing it herself,
and it does not count against her two-ring limit. The hand can
wear only one ring at a time.
Even without a ring, the hand itself allows its wearer to use day-
light and see invisibilityeach once per day.
Faint varied; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, animate dead, day-
light, detect invisibility; Price 8,000 gp; Weight 2 lb.
Hand of the Mage:This mummified elf hand hangs by a
golden chain around a character’s neck (taking up space as a magic
necklace would). It allows the wearer to utilize the spell mage hand
at will.
Faint transmutation; CL 2nd; Craft Wondrous Item, mage hand;
Price 900 gp; Weight 2 lb.
Harp of Charming:This instrument is a golden, intricately
carved harp. When played, it enables the performer to work one
suggestion (as the spell, Will DC 14 negates) into the music for each
10 minutes of playing if he can succeed on a DC 14 Perform
(string instruments) check. If the check fails, the audience cannot
be affected by any further performances from the harpist for 24
hours.
Faint enchantment; CL 5th; Craft Wondrous Item, suggestion;
Price 7,500 gp; Weight 5 lb.
Hat of Disguise:This apparently normal hat allows its wearer
to alter her appearance as with a disguise selfspell. As part of the dis-
guise, the hat can be changed to appear as a comb, ribbon, head-
band, cap, coif, hood, helmet, and so on.
Faint illusion; CL 1st; Craft Wondrous Item, disguise self; Price
1,800 gp.
Headband of Intellect: This device is a light cord with a small
gem set so that it rests upon the forehead of the wearer. The head-
band adds to the wearer’s Intelligence score in the form of an en-
hancement bonus of +2, +4, or +6. This enhancement bonus does
not earn the wearer extra skill points when a new level is attained;
use the unenhanced Intelligence bonus to determine skill points.
Moderate transmutation; CL 8th; Craft Wondrous Item, fox’s
cunning; Price 4,000 gp (+2), 16,000 gp (+4), 36,000 gp (+6).
Helm of Brilliance:This normal-looking helm takes its true
form and manifests its powers when the user dons it and speaks
the command word. Made of brilliant silver and polished steel, a
newly created helm is set with large magic gems: ten diamonds,
twenty rubies, thirty fire opals, and forty opals. When struck by
bright light, the helm scintillates and sends forth reflective rays in
all directions from its crownlike, gem-tipped spikes. The jewels’
functions are as follows:
•Diamond: Prismatic spray(save DC 20)
•Ruby: Wall of fire
•Fire opal: Fireball(10d6, Reflex DC 20 half )
•Opal: Daylight
The helm may be used once per round, but each gem can per-
form its spell-like power just once. Until all its jewels are depleted,
a helm of brilliancealso has the following magical properties when
activated.
•It emanates a bluish light when undead are within 30 feet. This
light  causes  1d6  points  of  damage  per  round  to  all  such  crea-
tures within that range.
•The wearer  may  command  any  weapon  he  wields  to  become  a
flaming weapon (see page 224). This is in addition to whatever
abilities  the  weapon  may  already  have  (unless  the  weapon
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS