6
Guildhall District, Former
For some reason, the guilds have moved out of this dis-
trict, but commercial interests still dominate its streets.
Buildings:Vacant guild halls (3), average lodging
(5), average food (10), upscale trades (5), average trades
(15), poor trades (4), upscale services (5), average serv-
ices (10), poor services (3), average residences (30).
First Impression: The guildhalls are boarded
up or in disrepair, but the shops and businesses that
surround them still thrive in the hustle and bustle of
commerce.
Social Class:Middle class.
Halfling Encampment
Halflings tend to be more nomadic than most other
races. Even when a group of them settles in a city, their
neighborhood looks more like a camp than a proper
district.
Buildings:Council  hall,  temple  (Yondalla),
shrine, average lodging (4), average food (8), average
trades (15), average services (10), average residences
(50).
First Impression: This neighborhood looks like
it could vanish tomorrow, leaving behind nothing but
half-constructed buildings, smoldering campfires, and
vacant building foundations.
Social Class:Middle class.
Marketplace
Most of the residents from surrounding districts come
to this bazaar to buy everything from necessities (such
as clothing) to small luxuries (such as spices).
Buildings:Open-air  market,  temple  (Fhar-
langhn), average lodging (2), average food (12), exotic
trades (3), upscale trades (12), average trades (35), poor
trades (10), upscale services (5), average services (15),
poor services (5).
First Impression: This district is awash in col-
orful signs and tents. The shouts of barkers rise above
the noise of shoppers, and a dozen scents—everything
from sweet perfumes to sizzling meats—fill the air.
Social Class:Middle class.
Professionals
This district is home to a variety of specialists the PCs
might want to hire or consult.
Buildings:Temple (any), shrine, average lodging
(3), upscale food (3), average food (7), exotic trades (2),
upscale trades (3), average trades (10), upscale services
(10), average services (20), upscale residences (10), aver-
age residences (20).
First Impression: This district features row
upon row of quiet shops and offices. Their signs adver-
tise everything from translation services to wilderness
guides to architectural design.
Social Class:Middle class.
Shops
A few businesses in this district cater to the well-to-do,
but most serve the city’s middle and lower classes. Such
a district is more common in a smaller city that doesn’t
have multiple shopping districts.
Buildings:Temple (any), shrine, average lodging
(3), average food (10), exotic trades (3), upscale trades
(12), average trades (35), poor trades (10), upscale serv-
ices (3), average services (10), poor services (2).
First Impression: Well-guarded nobles saunter
from shop to shop, seemingly oblivious to the more
ordinary citizens who rush by with their arms full of
packages.
Social Class:Middle class.
Temple District
The center of the city’s religious life, the temple district
is where established faiths vie for worshipers. PCs can
often find healing and other clerical magic here.
Buildings:Temples/shrines (any 6), upscale
lodging (1), average lodging (3), upscale food (3),
average food (7), exotic trades (5), upscale trades (5),
average trades (10), upscale services (10), average
services (25), upscale residences (5), average resi-
dences (20).
First Impression: Each temple’s architecture
reflects the faith of its builders. Periodically, the doors
of a temple open, and a throng of worshipers spills out
into the street.
Social Class:Middle class.
HIGH POPULATION DISTRICTS
These districts cater to the lower classes and to tran-
sients, such as adventurers. Prices are generally lower
in these areas.
Adventurer’s Quarter
This district has a little bit of everything, but it’s gener-
ally a pretty seedy place. No “respectable” resident
would think of coming here.
Buildings:Temples  (Olidammara  and  any  3
others), average lodging (5), poor lodging (10), average
food (5), poor food (15), average trades (6), poor trades
(15), average services (5), poor services (15), average res-
idences (5), poor residences (20).