282
turning, they serve the wielder as if called by a summon monster
Vspell cast at 20th level.
•Summon  Nightshade:  Once  per  month,  the  staff  can  summon  a
nightcrawler  nightshade  (see  page  195  of  the  Monster  Manual)
that serves the wielder as if called by a summon monster IX spell
cast at 20th level.
•Shadow  Form:Three  times  per  day  the  wielder  can  become  a
living  shadow,  with  all  the  movement  powers  granted  by  the
gaseous formspell.
•Shadow  Bolt:Three  times  per  day  the  staff  can  project  a  ray
attack  that  deals  10d6  points  of  cold  damage  to  a  single  target.
The shadow bolt has a range of 100 feet.
The Shield of Prator:A hero of old, the paladin Prator bore
this relic in many a valiant battle. The Shield of Pratordisappeared
when Prator fell in the Battle of the Three Hells, although it has
reportedly surfaced briefly from time to time since then. This +5
large shield,emblazoned with the symbol of the sun, allows the
wielder to cast spells as if she were a 20th-level paladin with a
Wisdom score of 20. The spells gained are cumulative with any
existing spells per day that the character might have, even if she’s
already a paladin. The Shield of Pratoralso grants spell resistance 15
to its wielder. It absorbs the first 10 points of damage from any
energy attack (fire, cold, acid, electricity, or sonic). In return for
all this, once per year the shield’s owner must undertake a quest
(no saving throw to avoid) at the behest of a lawful good deity.
A character who is evil or chaotic (LE, NE, CE, CN, CG) gains
four negative levels if she attempts to use this artifact. Although
these negative levels never results in actual level loss, they remain
as long as the shield is in hand and cannot be overcome in any way
(including restorationspells). The negative levels disappear when
the shield is stowed or leaves the wearer’s possession.
The Sword of Kas:The vampire Kas was the dreaded lieu-
tenant of Vecna. He used this mighty blade, created by his master,
to betray and attack the archlich, cutting off his hand and eye in a
terrible battle before Vecna destroyed him. Only his sword sur-
vived, and it is said to forever seek vengeance against Vecna. The
Sword of Kasis a +6 unholy keen vorpal longsword.It grants the
wielder a +10 enhancement bonus to Strength. The sword is intel-
ligent (Int 15, Wis 13, Cha 16, Ego 34) and chaotic evil. It can be
used to cast the following spells, once per day each: call lightning
(10d6 points of damage, Reflex DC 14 half ), blasphemy, and unhal-
low. Once per week it can be used to slay living.
CREATING MAGIC ITEMS
To create magic items, spellcasters use special feats. They invest
time, money, and their own personal energy (in the form of expe-
rience points) in an item’s creation. For details on creating the dif-
ferent types of magic items, see the appropriate section below as
well as the information on item creation feats in Chapter 5: Feats,
in the Player ’s Handbook.
Note that all items have prerequisites in their descriptions.
These prerequisites must be met for the item to be created. Most
of the time, they take the form of spells that must be known by the
item’s creator (although access through another magic item or
spellcaster is allowed).
While item creation costs are handled in detail elsewhere, note
that normally the two primary factors are the caster level of the
creator and the level of the spell or spells put into the item. A cre-
ator can create an item at a lower caster level than her own, but
never lower than the minimum level needed to cast the needed
spell. For example, a 15th-level wizard could craft a wand of fireball
at 10th caster level, or even as low as 5th level (the minimum
caster level for fireball, a 3rd-level spell), but no lower. If she did
this, the fireballwould in all ways be treated as if the caster was of
the lower specified level (for damage, range, and so on). Using
metamagic feats, a caster can place spells in items at a higher level
than normal. For example, a caster could heighten a spell’s level to
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
BEHIND THE CURTAIN: 
MAGIC ITEM GOLD PIECE VALUES
Many factors must be considered when determining the price of magic
items you invent. The easiest way to come up with a price is to match
the  new  item  to  an  item  priced  in  this  chapter  and  use  its  price  as  a
guide.  Otherwise,  use  the  guidelines  summarized  on  Table  7–33:
Estimating Magic Item Gold Piece Values.
Multiple  Similar  Abilities:  For  items  with  multiple  similar  abilities
that don’t take up space on a character’s body (see Magic Items on the
Body, page 214), use the following formula: Calculate the price of the
single most costly ability, then add 75% of the value of the next most
costly ability, plus one-half the value of any other abilities. (The many
spell-like powers of a staff of powerare a good example of multiple simi-
lar abilities).
Multiple Different Abilities: Abilities such as an attack roll bonus or
saving throw bonus and a spell-like function are not similar, and their
values are simply added together to determine the cost. For items that
do take up a space on a character’s body (such as a ring or a necklace),
each additional power not only has no discount but instead has a 50%
increase in price. A belt of Strength +4 and Dexterity +4is more valuable
than a belt of Strengthworn with gauntlets of Dexterity, since it takes up
only one space on a character’s body.
0-Level Spells:When multiplying spell levels to determine value, 0-
level spells should be treated as 1/2 level.
Other Considerations: Once you have a final cost figure, reduce that
number if either of the following conditions applies:
—Item  Requires  Skill  to  Use:Some  items  require  a  specific  skill
(such  as  Perform  for  a  musical  instrument)  to  get  them  to  function.
This factor should reduce the cost about 10%.
—Item  Requires  Specific  Class  or  Alignment  to  Use:Even  more
restrictive than requiring a skill, this limitation cuts the cost by 30%.
Prices presented in the magic item descriptions in this book (the
gold piece value following the item’s caster level) are the market value,
which is generally twice what it costs the creator to make the item. 
Since  different  classes  get  access  to  certain  spells  at  different
levels,  the  prices  for  two  characters  to  make  the  same  item  might
actually be different. Take hold person, for example. A cleric casts it as
a 2nd-level spell, so a cleric-created wand of hold personcosts 2 (2nd-
level spell) ×3 (3rd-level caster) ×750 gp, divided in half, or 2,250 gp.
However, a wizard casts hold personas a 3rd-level spell, so her wand
costs 3 (3rd-level spell) ×5 (5th-level caster) ×750 gp, divided in half,
or 5,625 gp. A sorcerer also casts hold personas a 3rd-level spell, but
he doesn’t get the spell until 6th level, so his wand costs 3 (3rd-level
spell) ×6 (6th-level caster) ×750 gp, divided in half, or 6,750 gp. The
wand is only worth two times what the caster of lowest possible level
(in this case, the cleric) can make it for, however, so the market price
of a wand of hold personis 4,500 gp, no matter who makes it.
You’ll notice, however, that not all the items presented here adhere
to  these  formulas  directly.  The  reasons  for  this  are  several.  First  and
foremost,  these  few  formulas  aren’t  enough  to  truly  gauge  the  exact
differences between, say, a ring of fire resistanceand boots of speed—two
very  dissimilar  items.  Each  of  the  magic  items  presented  here  was
examined and modified based on its actual worth. The formulas only
provide a starting point. The pricing of scrolls assumes that, whenever
possible,  a  wizard  or  cleric  created  it.  Potions  and  wands  follow  the
formulas  exactly.  Staffs  follow  the  formulas  closely,  and  other  items
require  at  least  some  DM  judgment  calls.  Use  good  sense  when
assigning prices, using the items in this book as examples.
pqqqqrs
pqqqqrs