194
a 1st-level wizard. He can still use the prohibited spells he knew
prior to becoming a Red Wizard, including using items that are
activated by spell completion or spell trigger.
For example, Ghorus Toth is specialized in the school of trans-
mutation. His prohibited schools are abjuration and enchant-
ment. When he becomes a Red Wizard, he must choose one other
prohibited school. He decides to select conjuration as his addi-
tional prohibited school.
Specialist Defense: A Red Wizard gains a bonus on saving
throws against spells from his specialist school. This bonus starts
at +1 and increases at higher levels, as shown on Table 6–15.
Spell Power: At 2nd level, a Red Wizard gains a bonus that
increases his effective caster level for purposes of
determining level-dependent spell variables and
for caster level checks. The bonus starts at +1
and increases at higher levels, as shown on
Table 6–15. This ability stacks with other
spell power benefits that affect spells
from the Red Wizard’s specialist school.
Bonus Feat:At 5th level, a Red Wizard
gains a bonus feat, which must be either
an item creation feat, a metamagic feat, or
the Spell Mastery feat.
Circle  Leader:  At 5th  level,  a  Red
Wizard  gains  the  ability  to  become  a
circle leader, who is the focus person for
Red Wizard circle magic (see New Fea-
tures of the Red Wizard, below).
Scribe Tattoo: At 7th  level,  a  Red
Wizard  gains  the  ability  to  place  the
Thayan wizards’ magic tattoos upon will-
ing and qualified novices, giving them the
Tattoo Focus feat and inducting them into
his circle.
Great Circle Leader: A 10th-level
Red Wizard can be the leader of a great
circle, which can have up to nine other
participants instead of just five.
New Features of the Red Wizard
The Red Wizard prestige class was origi-
nally  created  for  inclusion  in  the
F
ORGOTTEN
R
EALMS®Campaign Setting,and
uses several rules specific to that setting.
We’ve reproduced them here so you can better see
how the class works. Consider carefully before adding them to a
campaign that does not use the F
ORGOTTENREALMSsetting.
New Feat: Tattoo Focus [Special]
You bear the powerful magical tattoos of a Red Wizard of Thay.
Prerequisite:Specialized in a school of magic.
Region:Thay.
Benefit:Add +1 to the DC for all saving throws against spells
from your specialized school. You get a +1 bonus on caster level
checks (1d20 + caster level) to overcome a creature’s spell resist-
ance when casting spells from that school.
Special:Only characters with the Tattoo Focus feat can partici-
pate in Red Wizard circle magic (see below).
Circle Magic
Some of the most powerful and spectacular spells worked across
Faerûn are cast in the form of circle magic. Circle magic is a type
of cooperative spellcasting that allows the spellcaster leading the
circle to increase his caster level significantly and achieve results
otherwise unavailable to the spellcasters composing the circle.
The Red Wizards of Thay make frequent use of circle magic. Sto-
ries of other forms of circle magic abound in Faerûn.
Participation:The ability to participate in circle magic requires
the possession of the Tattoo Focus feat (see above).
One spellcaster, usually the most powerful or experienced char-
acter present, stands at the center of the circle. This character is
the circle leader. A Red Wizard cannot be a circle leader unless he
is at least a 5th-level Red Wizard.
A circle requires a minimum of two participants plus the circle
leader. Up to five partiicpants can aid a circle leader in a standard
circle; a Red Wizard of 10th level can lead a great circle containing
up to nine other participants.
All participants in a circle must stand within 10 feet of the circle
leader, who stands in the center.
Circle Powers:The first use of circle magic is to empower
the circle leader with the strength of all the participants.
This requires 1 full hour of uninterrupted concen-
tration on the part of all participants and the circle
leader. Each participant casts any single prepared
spell, which is consumed by the circle and has no
effect other than expending the prepared spell. The
spell levels expended by the circle participants are
totaled as circle bonus levels. Each bonus level may
be used to accomplish the following effects.
•Increase the circle leader’s caster level by one for
every  circle  bonus  level  expended  (maximum
caster  level  40th).  This  benefit  applies  to  level-
dependent  variables  of  a  spell  such  as  range  or
duration, and to level checks (dispel checks, checks
to overcome spell resistance, and so on).
•Add Empower Spell, Maximize Spell, or Heighten
Spell metamagic feats to spells currently prepared
by the circle leader. Each circle bonus level counts
as one additional spell level required by the appli-
cation  of  a  metamagic  feat  to  a  spell.  The  circle
leader  may  add  one  of  the  three  listed  feats  to  a
spell  even  if  he  does  not  know  the  feat  or  if  the
addition of the feat would raise the spell level past
the  circle  leader’s  normal  maximum  spell  level
(maximum spell level 20th).
These effects last for 24 hours or until expended.
Circle bonus levels may be divided up as the circle
leader sees fit. For example, the Red Wizard Hauth
Var leads a circle in which four participants each cast a
2nd-level spell, so that Hauth Var gains eight circle
bonus levels. Hauth Var chooses to use three circle
bonus levels to maximize his cone of coldspell, three to increase his
caster level from 10th to 13th for all level-based variables in his
spells, and two to provide a +2 bonus on any level checks he needs
to make. The maximized spell is used up whenever he casts his
cone of cold, and the other two effects remain for the next 24 hours.
Many high-level Red Wizards lead circles on a daily basis to exact
magical power from their apprentices.
SHADOWDANCER
Operating in the border between light and darkness, shadow-
dancers are nimble artists of deception. They are mysterious and
unknown, never completely trusted but always inducing wonder
when met.
Rogues, bards, and monks make excellent shadowdancers. Fight-
ers, barbarians, rangers, and paladins also find that shadowdancer
abilities allow them to strike at their opponents with surprise and
skill. Wizard, sorcerer, cleric, and druid shadowdancers employ the
defensive capabilities inherent in the prestige class to allow them to
cast their spells from safety and move away quickly. Despite their link
with shadows and trickery, shadowdancers are as often good as evil.
Shadowdancers often work in troupes, never staying in one
place too long. Some use their abilities to entertain. Others oper-
ate as thieves, using their abilities to infiltrate past defenses and
CHAPTER 6:
CHARACTERS
A red wizard