226
Throwing: This  ability  can  only  be  placed  on  a  melee
weapon. A melee weapon crafted with this ability gains a range
increment of 10 feet and can be thrown by a wielder proficient
in its normal use.
Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Magic
Arms and Armor, magic stone; Price +1 bonus.
Unholy: An unholy weapon is imbued
with unholy power. This power makes the
weapon evil-aligned and thus bypasses the
corresponding damage reduction. It deals
an extra 2d6 points of damage against all of
good alignment. It bestows one negative
level on any good creature attempting to
wield it. The negative level remains as long
as the weapon is in hand and disappears
when the weapon is no longer wielded. This
negative level never results in actual level
loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way
(including restorationspells)  while  the
weapon is wielded. Bows, crossbows, and
slings so crafted bestow the unholy power
upon their ammunition.
Moderate evocation [evil]; CL 7th; Craft
Magic Arms and Armor, unholy blight, creator
must be evil; Price +2 bonus. 
Vicious:When a vicious weapon strikes
an opponent, it creates a flash of disruptive
energy that resonates between the opponent
and the wielder. This energy deals an extra
2d6 points of damage to the opponent and
1d6 points of damage to the wielder. Only
melee weapons can be vicious.
Moderate necromancy; CL 9th; Craft Magic
Arms and Armor, enervation; Price +1 bonus.
Vorpal: This  potent  and  feared  ability
allows the weapon to sever the heads of
those it strikes. Upon a roll of natural 20 (fol-
lowed by a successful roll to confirm the crit-
ical hit), the weapon severs the opponent’s
head (if it has one) from its body. Some crea-
tures, such as many aberrations and all oozes,
have no heads. Others, such as golems and
undead creatures other than vampires, are
not affected by the loss of their heads. Most
other creatures, however, die when their
heads are cut off. The DM may have to make
judgment calls about this sword’s effect. A
vorpal weapon must be a slashing weapon. (If
you roll this property randomly for an inap-
propriate weapon, reroll.)
Strong necromancy and transmutation; CL 18th; Craft Magic
Arms and Armor, circle of death, keen edge; Price +5 bonus.
Wounding:A wounding weapon deals 1 point of Constitution
damage from blood loss when it hits a creature. A critical hit does
not multiply the Constitution damage. Creatures immune to criti-
cal hits (such as plants and constructs) are immune to the Consti-
tution damage dealt by this weapon.
Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
Mordenkainen’s sword; Price +2 bonus.
Specific Weapons
The following specific weapons usually are preconstructed with
exactly the qualities described here.
Adamantine Battleaxe: This nonmagical axe is made out of
adamantine. As a masterwork weapon, it has a +1 enhancement
bonus on attack rolls.
No aura (nonmagical); Price 3,010 gp.
Adamantine Dagger: This nonmagical dagger is made out of
adamantine. As a masterwork weapon, it has a +1 enhancement
bonus on attack rolls.
No aura (nonmagical); Price 3,002 gp.
Assassin’s Dagger:This wicked-looking, curved +2 daggerpro-
vides a +1 bonus to the DC of a Fortitude save forced by the death
attack of an assassin.
Moderate necromancy; CL 9th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
slay living; Price 18,302 gp; Cost 9,302 gp + 720 XP.
Dagger  of  Venom:This black +1 daggerhas  a  serrated  edge.  It
allows the wielder to use a poisoneffect (as the spell, save DC 14)
upon a creature struck by the blade once per day. The wielder can
decide to use the power after he has struck. Doing so is a free
action, but the poisoneffect must be invoked in the same round
that the dagger strikes.
Faint necromancy; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, poison;
Price 8,302 gp; Cost 4,302 gp + 320 XP.
Dwarven Thrower: This weapon commonly functions as a +2
warhammer. In the hands of a dwarf, the warhammer gains an
additional +1 enhancement bonus (for a total enhancement bonus
of +3) and gains the returning special ability. It can be hurled with
a 30-foot range increment. When hurled, it deals an extra 2d8
points of damage against giants or an extra 1d8 points of damage
against any other target.
Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
creator must be a dwarf of at least 10th level; Price 60,312 gp; Cost
30,312 gp + 2,400 XP.
Flame Tongue:This is a +1 flaming burst longsword.Once per
day, the sword can blast forth a fiery ray at any target within 30 feet
as a ranged touch attack. The ray deals 4d6 points of fire damage
on a successful hit.
Moderate evocation; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms
and Armor, scorching ray,and flame blade, flame strike,
or fireball;Price 20,715 gp; Cost 10,515 gp + 816 XP.
Frost Brand:This +3 frost greatswordsheds light
as a torch when the temperature drops below 0°F.
At such times it cannot be concealed when drawn,
nor can its light be shut off. Its wielder is protected
from fire; the sword absorbs the first 10 points
of fire damage each round that the wielder
would otherwise take.
A frost brandextinguishes all nonmagi-
cal fires in its area. As a standard action, it can
also dispel lasting fire spells such as wall of fire,
but not instantaneous effects such as fireball,
meteor swarm, and flame strike,though you must
succeed on a dispel check (1d20 +14) against each
spell to dispel it. The DC to dispel such spells is 11
+ the caster level of the fire spell.
Strong evocation; CL 14th; Craft Magic Arms
and Armor, ice storm, dispel magic, protection from
energy; Price 54,475 gp; Cost 27,375 gp and 5 sp +
2179 XP.
Holy Avenger: This +2 cold iron longswordbe-
comes a +5 holy cold iron longswordin the hands of
a paladin.
It provides spell resistance of 5 + the paladin’s
level to the wielder and anyone adjacent to her. It
also enables the wielder to use greater dispel magic
(once per round as a standard action) at the class
level of the paladin. (Only the area dispel is pos-
sible, not the targeted dispel or counterspell ver-
sions of greater dispel magic.)
Strong abjuration; CL 18th; Craft Magic Arms
and Armor, holy aura, creator must be good; Price
120,630 gp; Cost 60,630 gp + 4,800 XP.
Javelin of Lightning:This javelin becomes a
CHAPTER 7:
MAGIC ITEMS
Holy avenger
Flame tongue