168
PLANAR TRAITS
Designing a plane is like designing any other landscape—
although most planes are more fantastic and strange than the
forests, mountains, and plains that dominate the Material Plane.
You might include exotic terrain, vast dungeons, mighty for-
tresses, or cities teeming with weird denizens. In addition to these
elements, you’ll want to establish planar traits: rules that define
how a plane works in general terms.
The planes of D&D’s Great Wheel cosmology each have planar
traits that explain how characters move, fight, and cast spells
there. The Elemental Plane of Fire, for example, has the fire-dom-
inant trait, which means that the very substance of the plane deals
3d10 points of fire damage every round to creatures present on the
plane. The Astral Plane has the subjective directional gravity trait,
so creatures on the plane decide for themselves which way they
would like gravity to pull. Limbo has the strongly chaos-aligned
trait, so nonchaotic characters are penalized there.
When you design a plane for your own cosmology, choose the
traits described for planes on the Great Wheel (pages 147–150)
or invent your own. You can mix and match the traits from dif-
ferent planes if you like. For example, you could create a plane
called the Forge of Heaven that was both fire-dominant and
good-aligned.
Planar traits usually apply to the plane as a whole, but a plane is
a vast place. There may be particular locations within a plane
where the rules are different, perhaps because of natural effects,
godly interference, or magical localities.
A plane usually has traits that describe its gravity, the nature of
time on it, its size and shape, its morphic nature (how easy it is to
change reality there), its alignment, its elemental or energy type,
and any unusual effects on magic that occur on the plane. That’s
not an exhaustive list, however—design whatever planar traits
you need to make a plane you create work the way you want it to.
Additional Traits
Here are some planar traits that aren’t used in the D&D cosmology
but that might make good building blocks for planes you design.
Light Gravity:The gravity on a plane with this trait is less intense
than on the Material Plane. As a result, creatures find that they can
lift more, but their movements tend to be ungainly. Characters on
a plane with the light gravity trait take a –2 circumstance penalty
on attack rolls and Balance, Ride, Swim, and Tumble checks. All
items weigh half as much. Weapon ranges double, and characters
gain a +2 circumstance bonus on Climb and Jump checks.
Strength and Dexterity don’t change as a result of light gravity,
but what you can do with such scores does change. These advan-
tages apply to travelers from other planes as well as natives.
Falling characters on a light gravity plane take 1d4 points of
damage for each 10 feet of the fall (maximum 20d4).
You can choose to decrease gravity even further, doubling or
tripling the effect for a particular plane.
Flowing Time: On some planes, time can flow faster or slower.
One may travel to another plane, spend a year there, then return to
the Material Plane to find that only six seconds have elapsed.
Everything on the plane returned to is only a few seconds older.
But for that traveler and the items, spells, and effects working on
him, that year away was entirely real.
When designating how time works on planes with flowing
time, put the Material Plane’s flow of time first, followed by the
same flow in the other plane. For the example above, it would be 1
round = 1 year. For every year on the other plane, one 6-second
round has elapsed on the Material Plane.
The clever and the unscrupulous can abuse planes that have
flowing time. The ability to step into a slower time flow for the
purpose of healing and regaining spells is an effective weapon
against others. You’ll be back, completely refreshed, before your
foes even know you’re gone. Throwing opponents into a plane
with a slower time flow may keep them out of action for several
years and make their return a problem for future generations.
Erratic Time: Some planes have time that slows down and speeds
up, so an individual may lose or gain time as he moves between the
two planes. For each plane with erratic time you create, develop a
random generation table to determine the rate of time’s flow. The
following is provided as an example.
d%Time on Material PlaneTime on Erratic Time Plane
01–101 day1 round
11–401 day1 hour
41–601 day1 day
61–901 hour1 day
91–1001 round1 day
You’ll want to set how often (by Material Plane standards) a plane
with the erratic time trait shifts, requiring a new roll of the dice. To
the denizens of such a plane, time flows naturally and the shift is
unnoticed.
If a plane is timeless with respect to magic, any spell cast with a
noninstantaneous duration is permanent until dispelled.
Finite Shape: A plane with this trait has defined edges or borders.
These borders may adjoin other planes or hard, finite borders such
as the edge of the world or a great wall. Demiplanes are often finite.
Self-Contained Shape:On planes with this trait, the borders wrap
in on themselves, depositing the traveler on the other side of the
map. A spherical plane is an example of a self-contained, finite
plane, but there can be cubes, toruses, and flat planes with magical
edges that teleport the traveler to an opposite edge when he
crosses them. Some demiplanes are self-contained.
Static: These planes are unchanging. Visitors cannot affect
living residents of the plane, nor objects that the denizens possess.
Any spells that would affect those on the plane have no effect
unless the plane’s static trait is somehow removed or suppressed.
Spells cast before entering a plane with the static trait remain in
effect, however.
Even moving an unattended object within a static plane
requires a DC 16 Strength check. Particularly heavy objects may
be impossible to move.
Sentient: These planes are ones that respond to a single thought—
that of the plane itself. Travelers would find the plane’s landscape
changing as a result of what the plane thought of the travelers, either
becoming more or less hospitable depending on its reaction.
Alignment Traits:How a plane develops an alignment trait is a
chicken-and-egg situation. Certain planes are predisposed to par-
ticular alignments, so creatures of those alignments tend to settle
there. This makes the planes even more disposed to that align-
ment, and so on. That does not have to be true for “home of the
deities” planes you create.
A strongly neutral-aligned plane would stand in opposition to
all other moral and ethical principles: good, evil, law, and chaos.
Such a plane may be more concerned with the balance of the
alignments than with accommodating and accepting alternate
points of view. In the same fashion as for other strongly aligned
planes (see page 149), strongly neutral-aligned planes apply a –2
circumstance penalty to Intelligence-, Wisdom-, or Charisma-
based checks by any creature that isn’t neutral. The penalty is
applied twice (once for law/chaos, and once for good/evil), so neu-
tral good, neutral evil, lawful neutral, and chaotic neutral crea-
tures take a –2 penalty and lawful good, chaotic good, chaotic evil,
and lawful evil creatures take a –4 penalty.
Dead Magic:These planes have no magic at all. A plane with the
dead magic trait functions in all respects like an antimagic field
spell. Divination spells cannot detect subjects within a dead magic
plane, nor can a spellcaster use teleport or another spell to move in
or out. The only exception to the “no magic” rule is permanent
planar portals, which still function normally.
CHAPTER 5:
CAMPAIGNS