Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
Rotmaw the Reeking . The fortress is impenetrable, and 
only a siege lasting months could ever hope to claim the 
Hyacinth .
  One  scoundrel,  some  successful  Disguise  and  Bluff 
checks, and a little bit of Knowledge (local)—for some 
good  gladiatorial  stories—has  Rotmaw  fooled  and  the 
Hyacinth out of its vault in less than a half-hour . Thus, years 
of Brotherhood planning and hours of DM preparation 
were cast aside with a jaunty smile and a few simple dice 
rolls    .
  This  nightmare  scenario  is  every  Dungeon  Master’s 
fear   . But adventures including scoundrels don’t have to 
end this way, nor do they need to be all about tricks and 
PCs talking themselves out of danger . Rather, they should 
focus  on  compelling  problems  that  demand  solutions 
most likely to succeed with the resources at hand—or at 
least minimizing the loss of resources and blood . Such 
adventures should be fraught with twists and mounting 
developments, giving characters the opportunity to impro-
vise and be creative . They should challenge the scoundrel’s 
ingenuity and resourcefulness, outside the dungeon and 
within, allowing her to shine as both a cad and a charmer, 
as a clever combatant and quick thinker able to surmount 
any obstacle .
  Take the following four stereotypical adventure seeds, 
for example . Any one of these could easily be the basis 
of a standard D&D adventure, but with a simple shift in 
perspective or situation adjustment, they become perfect 
challenges for scoundrels .
defeaT T  he CulT
The party must track down a group of demon worship-
ers and defeat them and their minions before they can 
summon their dark patron . This mission could easily be a 
simple hack-and-slash strike, but to challenge a scoundrel, 
adopt a different approach and additional obstacles .
  In a scoundrelly variation of this adventure, the PCs 
might  need  to  infiltrate  the  cult  and  sabotage  it  from 
within . The initial challenge lies in discovering the cult’s 
location and a way to contact it . Once they overcome that 
barrier, the PCs must meet with and convince the cult-
ists that they’re willing and worthy to join, which might 
force them to devise some reason to avoid a foul initiation . 
This entire process could be made more difficult by the 
introduction of a cult member or kidnapped victim whom 
the PCs know, and whom they must silence or convince 
of their sincerity .
  Ultimately, when the time comes to turn against the 
cult, the PCs risk being sacrificed themselves in the final 
rite, or could unleash a greater danger as a result of their 
disruption .  Interrupting  the  cult’s  summoning  might 
open a portal that unleashes a stream of lesser fiends that 
grows and tries to consume the world . In either instance, 
only  quick  thinking  and  immediate  action  can  avert 
catastrophe .
save The PrInCess
This fantasy cliché sees the adventurers rescuing a damsel 
in distress from some foul villain .
  A number of variations on this theme make it a more 
compelling  scoundrel  adventure .  Perhaps  the  PCs  are 
entreated to bargain with the villain to win the princess 
back    . Finding out what the kidnapper wants and dealing 
with his demands, or conducting hostage negotiations, 
could  make  for  an  interesting  series  of  adventures .  If 
the villain has already made his demands clear, the PCs 
might have to convince him that they have what he wants, 
make the trade, and escape with the princess before their 
deception is discovered .
  In another variation, perhaps the princess doesn’t want 
to return with the PCs, or isn’t a princess at all (or even a 
female) . The PCs might need to accompany a hotheaded 
adventurer out to make her name, or bargain with her or 
otherwise  convince  her  to  return  home .  Alternatively, 
the “prisoner” might have actually eloped with her sup-
posed captor . In such a case, the PCs might have to resort 
to especially convincing trickery or even abduction to 
ensure her return—or help the lovers remain free, if her 
story touches their hearts .
  Indeed, the “princess” might not be a humanoid at all, 
but rather a royal pet or prized guardian, such as a gorgon, 
griffon, dragonne, or wyvern . When the subject of their 
mission is even more dangerous than the villain who stole 
it, the PCs need to use all their skill and guile to survive 
the rescue .
exPlore The dungeon
A D&D staple, dungeons feature an endless variety of lethal 
traps, cruel monsters, and fantastic treasure .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
adaPTable advenTure sITes
Adaptable adventure sites were first introduced in the Monster 
Manual  IV  supplement.  Instead  of  being  associated  with  a 
particular adventure, they depict some archetypal adventuring 
venues. The adaptable adventure sites in this chapter are loca-
tions suitable for scoundrel activities: a speakeasy in a rough 
part  of  town  (page  127),  a  black  market  and  thieves’  den  in 
the sewers of a great city (page 145), and a rebel encampment 
in a ruined temple (page 136). In addition, an overview map of 
the gatetown of Tradegate (page 131) supports the organization 
known as the Free League.
    Each of these maps can be used “out of the box”—all you, 
as  the  DM,  need  to  do  is  populate  them  with  appropriate 
characters, monsters, and rewards. Any of them, of course, can 
be modified to suit the needs of a particular story that’s being 
played out in the campaign.
Illus. by M. Phillippi

Scoundrels use their wits  
to overcome even the  
deadliest challenges

12 
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
  To challenge scoundrels, though, a dungeon must be 
more than room after room of monsters and traps . Yet this 
requirement doesn’t have to make dungeons more com-
plicated . Present the occasional encounter that challenges 
the wit rather than the sword . Riddles and puzzles can be 
fun, but the dungeon’s variety can extend beyond these . 
Laying a wide chasm in the path of the PCs forces them 
to look for ways to climb or swing over, use materials from 
previous areas to create a bridge, or otherwise innovate . 
The hazards in the Dungeon Master’s Guide and books such 
as the Frostburn, Sandstorm, and Stormwrack supplements 
also present obstacles that take planning to surmount . A 
room filled with hurricane-force winds, in the path of 
crushing water, or tainted by brown mold makes a far more 
interesting barrier than a mere magically locked door .
  With some simple additions, even basic traps and haz-
ards can become challenges suited to scoundrels . Perhaps 
a falling-block trap can be disabled only by reaching its 
controls atop a crumbling statue, or the flame jets in the 
walls might actually be hidden kobold sorcerers . Even the 
most normal-looking floor becomes dangerous if it’s an 
illusion . Occasionally deceive the characters; if everything 
isn’t always what it seems, scoundrels have the opportunity 
to be daring and think fast to survive .
  Your “dungeon” doesn’t need to be the typical multi-
leveled castle or crypt . Maybe it’s a series of burrows still 
inhabited by the creatures that dug them, or a tall build-
ing fallen onto its side . Try making the dungeon itself a 
hazard: Fill the location with fast-moving water, expose 
it to extreme temperatures, or even slant it wildly so PCs 
need to climb in order to explore . Innovations such as 
these compel the characters to put additional thought into 
their delve and make preparations beyond merely bashing 
in the next door .
  Also, try stocking your dungeon with monsters that 
require skill or cleverness to defeat: After only one slash, 
an adventurer should realize that attacking a black pudding 
in melee probably isn’t the wisest method of defeating 
it  . Consider using monsters with gaze attacks, evil fey 
vulnerable only to cold iron, ethereal foes, or creatures 
with unusual forms of movement that require PCs to be 
creative with their tactics . Such creatures require a few 
Knowledge checks or trial and error to defeat and can make 
an otherwise simple encounter much more rewarding .
sla Y T  he dragon
This iconic D&D adventure sees a brave band of adventur-
ers face one of the most awesome monsters in existence 
and claim a dozen royal ransoms in treasure .
  The easiest way to make this plot better suit scoundrels 
is to choose a dragon whose Challenge Rating is substan-
tially higher than the average level of the PCs . Characters 
who expect to defeat a foe merely by having their full hit 
points and a full complement of spells have little reason 
to innovate . Those who know that their only hope for 
victory—and  survival—depends  on  unfair  advantage, 
clever traps, quick thinking, fast action, and a bit of luck, 
are much more likely to seek creative answers and tactics 
for their impending confrontation .
  Even after the defeat of the dragon, the creature’s hoard 
can trigger more adventures . Thieves, jealous aristocrats, 
and other dragons might make plays to kill the PCs and 
take their new wealth . Any number of causes and religions 
might harass the party for donations . Victims of the dragon 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
beknIgh  Ted
My Most Dread And Favored Master:
 I have the misfortune to report to you a most unpleasant turn 
of events during our recruitment and disciplinary expedition of 
two nights past in Old Town. I know that failure is unacceptable 
to She Who Will Not Be Denied, and I humbly offer my unworthy 
head.  I  ask  only  that  those  who  followed  my  ill-advised  com-
mand not suffer my much deserved fate.
    I  was  leading  a  patrol  of  six  initiates  into  the  less  traveled 
areas  of  the  district,  especially  those  near  taverns  and  other 
institutions of ill repute, to spread the news of Her coming and 
to induct new servants of Her will. We were also charged with 
eliminating obvious enemies of our great mission.
    We had just enlightened a downtrodden victim of this heart-
less kingdom and were transporting him back to base when a 
lookout spotted a small band of that sort of ruffians who call 
themselves  adventurers.  These  brutes,  led  by  an  insufferable 
so-called champion of the light, were clearly spoiling for a fight, 
with weapons drawn and bellicose demeanors.
    I  decided  to  further  Her  cause  as  well  as  remove  this  stain 
from the streets. Directing two followers to the rooftops, I led 
the remaining forces to an alley bordering the intruders’ most 
likely  path  (depositing  our  newest  recruit  farther  within  for 
safety). When they drew into range, the snipers opened fire and 
scattered the approaching party. Our squad then surged from 
the alley and isolated two of them, including the paladin.
    The fight initially went well. We focused on the armor-plated 
paladin first and quickly dropped him, then turned our attention 
to the other adventurer. Our snipers were coming under some 
pressure from the others, but we would be able to relieve them 
momentarily. But just as I was about to strike the killing blow, I 
was staggered by a mighty stroke from behind me—the paladin 
had only feigned death! I was forced to turn my attention toward 
him,  which  gave  the  other  adventurers  an  opening  to  relieve 
their companion. Within seconds the battle had turned, and in 
the interests of preserving as many of Her followers as possible, 
I ordered a retreat.
 In all, we lost three loyal servants as well as the newest recruit, 
who apparently fled the scene without striking a blow. I regret 
that I did not anticipate such action, and I accept full responsi-
bility for the injury to Her cause. I only pray She will not devour 
my soul.
Your repentful servant,
Delthan

12 
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
might seek the return of their stolen goods . The newly 
wealthy PCs must be either subtle or cunning to avoid 
losing their fortune . Alternatively, a strange hoard might 
force characters to be clever just in spending it . Thousands 
of coins printed with a well-known blasphemous symbol, 
hundreds of cords of an incredibly rare magical wood, or an 
entire hoard melted into a massive, bejeweled lump—each 
could each make for its own adventures . Overall, great 
wealth might bring more trouble than it’s worth .
dMIng WITh 
sC oundrels
Players aren’t the only ones at the gaming table who need 
to change their thinking to account for scoundrel charac-
ters   . Ever unpredictable, a scoundrel can be challenging, 
even frustrating, to handle for the DM . Just as Chapter 
1 describes the scoundrel in player’s terms, this section 
gives  the  DM  some  advice  on  handling  scoundrels  in 
the game .
aga  Ins  T T  he sCoundrel
Scoundrel  characters  are  not  cheaters .  Many  D&D 
adventures rely on fast-paced combat, deadly traps, and 
hazard-filled  dungeons;  scoundrels  prefer  to  talk  their 
way out of encounters or find ways to circumvent them . 
This tendency might frustrate you if you have created a 
dungeon of artful and deadly complexity, but you should 
resist the urge to force the PCs down a specific path . 
  The trick is to compromise, but on your own terms . 
Allow the scoundrel a victory every now and then . Let her 
pull the wool over a few guards’ eyes, turn some monsters 
against their masters, or even steal a villain’s favorite magic 
item   . Her victories are fun changes of pace and make the 
player proud of her choices . But don’t let her get away with 
everything . Let her think she’s won, then spring another 
trap,  give  the  occasional  enemy  a medallion  of  thoughts, 
helm of telepathy, or some other means of reading minds, or 
confront her with foes that can’t be charmed or reasoned 
with    . Don’t always let a scoundrel discover every danger . 
Surprise her with something she didn’t expect . 
  Strike a balance between making a scoundrel feel clever 
and not allowing your game to go astray, but always reward 
truly inventive plans .
usIng The sCoundrel
Rather than opposing a scoundrel character’s charm and 
daring, try using it to your advantage . Daring heists, dis-
guised identities, and fast talking to get out of danger are all 
thrilling story features in their own right . When such cons 
go wrong, though, exciting and memorable adventures are 
also born of trials, jailbreaks, recovering lost treasures, 
or escaping a dreadful demise . Even in dungeons, a plan 
that avoids one trap might result in springing another, 
puzzles might guard a potent threat instead of treasure, 
and befriending an opponent might lead to a whole host 
of problems—especially if a monster decides to tag along 
with its new buddy .
su Per-sMarT oPP onenTs
Scoundrels  are  clever,  and  you  should  give  them  the 
chance to exercise their guile . While they have cunning, 
you have access to dozens of equally shrewd opponents 
and vastly experienced monsters, many with genius-level 
intellects . Bend the rules in favor of the enemy from time 
to time and make changes to your adventure on the fly 
to  represent  uncanny  anticipation  of  the  PCs’  actions . 
For example, you might not have expected a scoundrel’s 
ingenious plot to infiltrate a spell-warded tomb, but the 
ancient, paranoid lich that lurks within (which you have 
just concocted) surely has .
  Keep in mind that not all enemies are geniuses, though . 
Players inevitably become discouraged and frustrated if 
every opponent is always a step ahead of them .
sC oundrels and 
nonsCoundrels
Don’t forget your group’s other characters (and their play-
ers) as you deal with scoundrels . Don’t give scoundrels too 
much of the limelight, especially if that leaves other players 
doing nothing but watching . As in any session that could 
become monopolized by one character, scoundrel or no, 
make sure to give other PCs the opportunity to shine .
  Just as characters shouldn’t feel penalized for not making 
the same choices as a scoundrel, the scoundrel should not 
feel like his companions are holding him back . He might 
dance down a deathtrap-laden hall or teleport past it, but 
his full plate-girded companion is unlikely to follow as 
easily . In campaigns featuring both scoundrels and non-
scoundrels, try to strike a balance between both types of 
characters and make sure that they realize they’re part of 
the same team . Allow the scoundrel to avoid a trap so he 
can deactivate it for the others, while his companions cover 
him with ranged attacks or hold back a deadly creature .
TheMes of sCoundrel 
advenTures
Scoundrels  get  involved  in  any  number  of  gambles, 
ventures, cons, and schemes that might fall outside the 
norm of more commonplace adventures . DMs who wish 
to incorporate scoundrelly themes into their game might 
consider some of the following possibilities .
assassIna  TI  on
Sometimes the best way to deal with a threat is to remove 
it, precisely and efficiently . Assassination, though often 
seen as evil, might be the last resort of even the most 
righteous character . 
  Magic takes the place of high technology in fantasy 
assassinations . A wizard or sorcerer is as effective a killer 
as a member of the assassin prestige class, so assassina-

12 
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
tion missions are tailor-made for spellcasting scoundrels . 
Enlarged  medium-  and  long-range  spells  can  place  an 
arcane spellcaster far enough away to make finding him 
extremely difficult . An enlarged fireball, for example, has 
a range of at least 1,360 feet and explodes exactly where its 
caster wants it to without need of a ranged attack roll . Less 
destructive spells also exist, of course, allowing stealthier 
spellcasters to eliminate a target with relative impunity . 
Even magic missile can be lethal once a caster hits 9th level . 
Phantasmal killer has the same range as magic missile, but 
leaves no visual evidence . At close range, the best spells 
are those that allow a killer to get into position without 
being noticed, such as invisibility and other illusion spells . 
The assassin spell list is an excellent source when deciding 
on appropriate spell selection .
  Using a physical weapon instead of a spell lets you slip 
past magical protections . A bow with the bane special 
ability and arrows of slaying, or a sword with the bane and 
keen special abilities can bring down most NPCs . Physical 
weapons, however, can be traced more easily than magical 
effects: An arrow or crossbow bolt could let a spellcasting 
investigator use scrying on you, while magic melee weapons 
have distinctive appearances, making them difficult to 
hide or fence .
ConTraband and sMugglIng
When wizards can level city blocks with merely a word and 
monsters can disintegrate with a stare, governments in a 
fantasy setting would seem to have greater concerns than 
policing mundane trade . Societies, however, still forbid 
certain goods, and tax revenue is still vital, so contraband 
of an unusual nature can exist in a magical world .
  Historically,  contraband  is  any  illegal  sort  of  goods . 
Drugs, alcohol, weapons, and slaves are the most familiar 
examples . Depending on the nature of a society, other 
items might be banned, censored, or restricted, such as 
poisons,  infectious  substances,  medicine,  destructive 
materials or creatures, pamphlets, books, music, and other 
kinds of “offensive” art and technology . In a world filled 
with magical and monstrous dangers, contraband might 
also  include  alchemical  substances,  destructive  magic 
items, material components for dangerous spells, portable 
traps, monsters or their body parts, certain holy symbols, 
gate keys, and even members of specific races . 
  As a direct result of being outlawed, the value of illegal 
items increases significantly . Thus, smuggling is a lucra-
tive venture for those who dare to break the law and risk 
being caught with such goods . In adventures featuring 
scoundrels, contraband and smuggling can be profitable 
and  exciting;  an  example  might  be  transporting  black 
onyx gems for use in animate  dead spells or delivering 
monstrous  prisoners  to  a  slave  trader .  Good-aligned 
characters might instead spirit enslaved creatures out of 
a cruel empire, import works of art into an oppressed city, 
or help a deposed ruler escape assassination .
  With the restriction of certain items comes measures 
against their use and import, making life as a smuggler 
difficult and dangerous . Such action might be as simple as 
guards checking wagons at a city gate and thrusting spears 
into haystacks, but far more intrusive methods might be 
the norm in an especially repressive or vigilant nation . 
These include random searches of private residences, raids 
on suspected stores and safe houses, pervasive divination 
magic, and authorities wielding magic items such as rings 
of X-ray vision. 
fen CI  ng sTolen goods
Ill-gotten gains (or simply those subject to scrutiny) can be 
profitable, but finding a buyer is not always easy . And if you 
are the buyer, you need to take some basic precautions . 
  The key to successfully fencing stolen goods is speed and 
distance . Wise people of wealth know someone who can 
cast locate object in case they lose an item to thievery . That 
spell has a limited range, however, so taking a valuable item 
out of a city usually protects the fence or smuggler from it . 
You can keep a stolen item within its former owner’s city 
if you use some forethought . Locate object has a maximum 
range of 1,200 feet for a 20th-level caster (who usually 
has better things to do than to try to track down stolen 
goods); many cities and some larger towns are extensive 
enough that several castings of the spell would be needed 
to cover them . In addition, the spell can be stymied by 
a thin sheet of lead or polymorph any object . Keeping the 
stolen item within a lead-lined box or changing it until 
the heat dies down fools this otherwise effective method 
of detection .
  Other divination spells can cause trouble if you’re not 
careful . To counter such effects, the best fences have abjura-
tion and illusion magic handy to disguise stolen items or 
keep them undetectable . Spells as simple as disguise self and 
obscure object or as powerful as mind blank and screen should 
always be in a fence’s arsenal . And under no circumstances 
should you leave behind a calling card or other personal 
effect at the scene of a crime, no matter how badly you 
want the ego boost .
  Magic provides excellent ways to transport stolen goods 
for sale elsewhere and to make the goods easier to sell . 
Teleportation spells take you to a buyer relatively easily, 
and bags of holding and similar magic can hide stolen items 
until they are ready to be revealed . When you attempt 
to sell an item, subtle magic such as Nystul’s magic aura, 
prestidigitation, and even silent image can all contribute to 
a higher sale price (or disguise an item enough to make it 
salable) .
In TerrogaTI  on
Scoundrels are good at getting information out of people, 
although their methods can differ widely . In a fantasy 
world, interrogation often involves magic, though tried-
and-true methods such as “good cop–bad cop,” or hitting 
someone until he talks (using nonlethal damage), still work 

12 
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
in a pinch . Regardless of which side of the law they’re on, 
organizations turn to magic for more dependable results, 
from zone of truth and charm person to suggestion and domi-
nate person. A group with enough magical resources can 
eventually uncover the information it desires .
  The least pleasant types of scoundrels use healing magic 
to free themselves from the bother of dealing only nonle-
thal damage . Slashing an unfortunate prisoner to within 
an inch of his life and then magically restoring him to 
consciousness is enough to weaken the will of most .
  Of course, you don’t need to rely on magic to convince 
someone to talk . Using the Intimidate, Bluff, and Diplo-
macy skills can get all the information you need from 
NPCs without spending a single spell .
roMan  Ce
Scoundrels  are  expert  at  using  romance  and  similarly 
tender feelings to their advantage . Having a tryst with an 
attractive young noble, seducing a royal consort to influ-
ence his spouse, charming a servant to gain access to her 
master’s home—such feigned or temporary flings can be 
valuable  weapons  in  a  charismatic  scoundrel’s  arsenal . 
Conversely, even a scoundrel might do all for the sake of 
another, making love a powerful plot device .
  Romance  in  your  game  can  be  handled  in  several 
ways .  Commonly,  it  is  relegated  to  the  realm  of  a  few 
Charisma-based  checks,  making  such  feelings  little 
more than aftereffects of successful Diplomacy or Bluff 
attempts . Though simplistic, this choice allows players to 
concentrate more on their characters’ goals than on minor 
details .
  Some players and DMs with a personal attachment to 
the  campaign  world  might  have  their  characters  grow 
to truly care for certain individuals . Besides making the 
world seem more real, an ongoing romance might give a 
character a source of information, a protector, an eager 
supporter, and a home to return to . These comforts are 
rarely quantifiable, but over the course of a campaign, the 
aid of a loving spouse, partner, or significant other might 
make a big difference . In more materialistic terms, an 
affair with the high priest of the deity of love might yield 
free healing, while romancing a sorcerer could lead to a 
steady stream of useful spells . 
  For a DM, the objects of characters’ romantic feelings 
make tempting targets to imperil and thus motivate PCs . 
But if a character’s every lover immediately becomes the 
focus of some nefarious plot, that PC will likely shy away 
from further romantic pursuits . For these same reasons, 
be wary of PCs trying to cozy up to powerful individuals 
merely to gain the benefits of their connections, abilities, 
or possessions . An NPC who discovers that he is being 
used might be a vindictive jilted lover .
  As soon as an in-game romantic liaison appears to be 
developing, especially of the long-term variety, the DM 
and  players  should  seriously  address  the  relationship . 
Few  groups  are  comfortable  with  detailed  specifics  of 
the affair, nor is it fun for other players to sit idly by as 
the lovers discuss their romance . Therefore, for the sake 

12 
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
of continuing the adventure and the enjoyment of all the 
players, the details of an ongoing relationship should best 
happen behind the scenes or “off camera .”
organIza TI  ons
Scoundrels are attracted to social settings and enjoy the 
company  of  quick-thinking  colleagues .  Their  wit  and 
cleverness are largely wasted in seclusion . Thus, scoundrels 
form or join groups where they can find others with phi-
losophies and goals similar to their own . In such company, 
they can put their talents to greater use, benefit from the 
support of like-minded colleagues, and test their skills 
against ever more trying and rewarding challenges .
  The following sample organizations present a few dif-
ferent approaches to the scoundrel archetype, depending 
on the preferences of the player and her character .
The free league
“Only the strong believe in themselves.”
—Bria Tomay, former Indep leader
No one knows the truth or is going to make life better for 
you, so it’s best to live your way . This simple belief is the 
core doctrine of one of the largest and farthest-reaching 
organizations in all the multiverse .
  The Free League, a group of free thinkers, bohemians, 
and  revolutionaries,  believes  in  personal  independence 
as a virtue above all others . The group has no holdings or 
official leadership, a result of its fierce assertion that no 
one person can know what is best for other individuals . It 
is an organization in name only . Its members number all 
who share a similarly self-reliant spirit and who adopt the 
group’s symbol, a stylized dragon devouring its own tail . 
These members call themselves “Indeps” (short for “Inde-
pendents”), and anyone who intrudes on their freedom 
swiftly realizes that they don’t claim this title lightly .
Joining the free league
The Free League is not divided by lines of race or profes-
sion   . Anyone who can see the appeal of living free can 
become a member, and no induction process exists . An 
Indep who has heard of the league but never met another 
member belongs to the group just as much as one who 
spent decades trolling the Great Bazaar in Sigil .
Entry Requirements
Alignment: Any non-evil.
The Free League exists largely as a doctrine by which 
members live and as a way to aid the oppressed . No 
member is required to go out of her way to spread the 
group’s dogma, but many are so inspired by the belief that 
all creatures have a right to be free that they seek to undo 
the harnesses of the oppressed and persecuted wherever 
they might find them .
free league benefits
Because the Free League includes members from all walks 
of life, the benefits that specific individuals might provide 
are varied . What the league itself can provide, however, 
is absolutely nothing . It has no structure and offers no 
official support . However, few Indeps turn away a fellow 
member in need . Because all the following benefits rely 
on the good will of individual members, a character must 
be on affable terms with those granting aid . Only NPCs 
with friendly or better attitudes grant the noted services 
and information . Often merely knowing that someone is 
an Indep is enough to elicit a friendly response, but some 
particularly private, accidentally wronged, or merely busy 
members might turn away their fellows . Aiding members 
in need is a secondary tenet of the Free League, a fact wisely 
remembered by all seeking to impose on their fellows .
 Services:  Indeps  regularly  offer  colleagues  general 
support . Even the lowliest member can usually provide a 
good meal, a bed, a place to heal, or a place to hide . Wher-
ever Indeps gather, they can feel as though they’re among 
family and those who will watch out for them . League 
members provide this support to other Indeps whenever 
they are able, but they refuse to be taken advantage of . 
The organization does not long tolerate those who abuse 
another member’s good will or make a burden of them-
selves without some sort of payment, regardless of shared 
ideals .
  Many Indeps grant fellow members a discount on their 
services, whatever they might be, from simple blacksmith-
ing to casting spells . League members typically sell their 
wares or services to other Indeps at a 20% discount .
 Gear: The Free League counts numerous rebels and iso-
lationists among its members . Such Indeps keep stocks of 
weaponry in preparation for coming conflicts or merely for 
their own needs . Sometimes fellow members can borrow 
these provisions if they can convince an owner they’ll be 
put to good use .
  Should an Indep PCs encounter a member with a reason 
to have an arsenal—even if that reason is merely para-
noia—she might be able to borrow any weapon, piece of 
armor, or item that she needs and that the owner is willing 
to part with . The Indep must have an attitude of helpful 
to even consider lending his supplies to other members . 
What is kept within these caches varies from member to 
member and depends on the owner’s reasons for keeping 
them . Thus, an isolationist might store food and supplies, 
whereas a resister could be stockpiling weapons for the 
coming revolution . An Indep cache usually contains a total 
of 300 gp worth of simple and martial weapons, light and 
medium armor, and useful adventuring gear (primarily 
rations) .  Particularly  well-stocked  stores  might  include 
up to 1,200 gp worth of minor magic items, often potions 
or scrolls .
 Information: While  the  Free  League  has  no  orga-
nized  method  of  communication,  members  travel  and 
regularly meet other members . Some even wander the 

12 
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
planes, passing along news from lands far, wide, and even 
beyond imagining . Any member of the Free League a PC 
encounters has a 25% chance of having heard tidbits of 
information about local or planar happenings . PCs gain a 
+5 bonus on Knowledge (geography), Knowledge (local), 
and Knowledge (the planes) checks made 
with the help of such knowledgeable 
Indeps .
  Being part of an organization 
that  was  birthed  on  the  Outer 
Planes,  Indeps  know  of  local 
planar gates, where they lead, 
and  how  to  activate  them . 
Again, 25% of league members 
possess  such  knowledge  and 
are willing to pass it on to fellow 
members .
 Status: Indeps are beloved by under-
dogs and the oppressed, but are feared and 
hated by those in power . Members of the Free 
League typically gain a +2 circumstance bonus 
on  interaction  checks  when  dealing  with  rebels 
and freedom fighters, but take a –2 circumstance 
penalty  when  dealing  with  political  leaders, 
nobles, and the wealthy .
Playing an Indep
Indeps value freedom and personal independence over 
all other things . While they understand the benefits and 
necessity of some aspects of government, they openly scoff 
at powerful individuals who claim to know what’s best for 
their people or seek to lead their followers to some vague 
greater tomorrow . Indeps believe that no one knows what 
a person wants or how to better attain one’s goals than 
that individual, and that each person has a right to seek 
happiness in one’s own way, without interference from 
others  or  some  self-important  government .  The  group 
doesn’t tout this philosophy as an excuse for lawlessness 
or debauchery, though, for such chaos can interfere with 
the happiness of others just as easily as a strict regime 
can   .  Rather,  the  Free  League  values  personal  privacy, 
acceptance of—or at least noninterference with—one’s 
neighbors, and the right to come and go as one pleases . 
The league also acknowledges that sometimes people need 
help, and those who share the same ideas should aid their 
advancement . Just as good neighbors help one another, so 
do Indeps strive to help their fellows in ways that don’t 
interfere with either party’s needs or wishes .
  As an Indep, nothing is more important to you than 
freedom—not just your own, but the concept and the right 
of all creatures to be free . Some characters might take their 
belief to extremes, seeking to liberate caged animals and 
mistreated pets, but most care primarily about the rights 
of sentient creatures . You have little patience for laws or 
bureaucracy . Although you don’t go out of your way to 
break local rules, you vehemently oppose unjust edicts, as 
well as elitism, slavery, and bigotry in all its forms . This atti-
tude might earn you the enmity of those in power, but you 
can often find support among the downtrodden and the 
oppressed . Because you do not work toward some greater 
end, some see you as flightily indulging your whims and 
desires . Such pitiable folk are shackled by self-imposed 
responsibilities and speak out of envy . Perhaps your 
sense of personal freedom and self-worth can lead 
them to a more enlightened, enjoyable state .
   Indeps are as much philosophers as 
they are wanderers and freedom fight-
ers   . Thus, you might be quick to 
debate your group’s beliefs with 
both  your  allies  and  your  ene-
mies, ever trying to win others 
over to your way of thinking . The 
more rigid the opponent’s think-
ing, the greater the challenge to 
your ideals, and thus the sweeter 
the victory when you change her 
mind . 
 Combat: An Indep’s tactics in combat 
largely depend on who or what she’s fighting 
against . While they are not pacifists, the live-and-
let-live attitude of group members leads them to 
avoid physical conflict . If forced into a fight with another 
thinking creature, an Indep tries to land a few solid blows 
and then extricate herself, or use nonlethal damage to 
incapacitate her opponent .
  When  someone  tries  to  rob  an  Indep  or  others  of 
their  freedom,  she  becomes  a  much  more  tenacious 
opponent .  The  misguided  and  short-sighted  receive 
sound thrashings—especially when they make pests of 
themselves—though  these  beatings  rarely  amount  to 
anything serious . Bigots and heavy-handed law enforcers 
provoke an Indep’s wrath much more easily . Willing to 
die to defend their freedoms, Indeps are also willing to 
kill to protect those rights . Members of the Free League 
are not anarchists or murderers, but neither do they allow 
strength or numbers to deter them when they encounter 
such close-minded fools .
  Every now and then a purposeful Indep might make it 
her mission to bring down a tyrant or criminal leader . In 
such cases, stealth, deadly sniper shots, and willingness 
for self-sacrifice are the ways of these guerrilla fighters .
 Advancement: Joining the Free League is as simple 
as meeting a member, discovering a shared state of mind, 
and putting on the symbol of the faction . The group has 
no formal induction and no list of members . Indeps share 
only a devout belief in the right of all sentient creatures 
to be free and live as they choose .
  The  group’s  primary  principles  are  noninterference 
and the right of each member to do as she pleases . As an 
offshoot of this philosophy, the league holds no meetings, 
has no forced obligations, no dues, nor any other rules or 
requirements . No one polices the members, since some-
Symbol of the  
Free League
Illus. by M. Coimbra

10
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
one without the proper mentality to be an Indep either 
wouldn’t join in the first place, or is likely to have his badge 
removed by another member .
  The Free League has no true leaders, but occasionally 
members  of  particular  vision  and  magnetism  attract  a 
following . Such influential figures motivate their fellow 
Indeps to greater deeds, such as establishing their phi-
losophy in a close-minded city or discrediting a corrupt 
leader . Indeps who follow these members do so not out of 
obligation, but of their own free will .
 Missions:  Although  the  Free  League  itself  imposes 
no tasks upon its members, many Indeps take to lives of 
travel, exploration, and adventure . Embracing the spirit 
of freedom, they go where the winds blow them, spread-
ing knowledge of their philosophy as they wander . These 
Indeps also seek to stamp out minor restrictive forces along 
the way, including corrupt officials, overzealous priests, 
thuggish sheriffs, and others who would steal the rights 
of the people .
  Throughout the planes, but especially in the gate town 
of Tradegate on the Concordant Domain of the Outlands, 
Indeps make lives for themselves as traders and explorers . 
They are some of the few folk willing (or crazy enough) 
to delve into the depths of the Lower Planes . They are no 
fools, though, and always set out fully equipped to survive 
and escape . Their free spirits also seem to afford them 
some physiological protection against the soul-crushing 
oppressiveness of those planes .
 Responsibilities: Indeps have no duties beyond those 
they choose . To impose responsibilities on Free League 
members would be hypocritical, and the far-flung, infor-
mal nature of the group would make any sort of unified 
decision or requirement meaningless . Despite having no 
official requirements, Indeps help fellow members when-
ever possible as a matter of honor and kinship . Members 
provide what aid they can, which might range from helping 
at another member’s shop to fighting by her side against 
enemies, depending on the Indep’s capabilities .
The free league in the World
“Think for yourself! Don’t listen to me!”
—Valek Xander, Indep wanderer
Members  of  the  Free  League  might  appear  anywhere . 
Since the group has no rigid organization or responsi-
bilities, any individual could be a member . Whether in 
the outspoken philosophizing of a planar traveler or the 
quiet determination of a local baker, the vibrant spirit 
of  freedom  and  independence  flourishes  in  brutally 
oppressed  communities  and  in  unlikely  souls .  Even 
where no one speaks out about such matters, the symbol 
of the dragon eating its tail emblazoned on a storefront 
or scrawled on an alley wall serves as a sign of hope and 
aid to the free-willed .
 Structure: The Free League is an organization in name 
only    . It has no central decision-making body, no means of 
widespread communication, and members scattered across 
the innumerable planes . Only Indeps’ shared dedication 
to the group’s ideals and to each other makes the league a 
reality .
  The  history  of  the  Free  League  can  be  traced  back 
through the centuries to the earliest days of Sigil, the City 
of Doors (see the Planar Handbook supplement for more 
information). For centuries Sigil’s people were divided 
among dozens of factions, groups, and cliques that held 
control over particular parts of the city . One such group 
was the Free League, which existed then much as it does 
now: unorganized, open-minded, and above all, free .
  Eventually  the  Lady  of  Pain,  the  enigmatic  ruler  of 
Sigil, grew tired of the constantly skirmishing factions 
within  her  city  and  demanded  that  the  groups  reduce 
their number to a mere fifteen within a week’s time, on 
penalty of death . Thousands died as groups fled the city, 
warred against each other, or disbanded . The Free League 
fared the best during the resulting chaos, attracting free 
thinkers and open-minded creatures of all walks—if only 
to be part of something while weathering the storm of the 
faction purge . For a time the Free League counted more 
than a million badge-wearing members in Sigil alone .
  Over the centuries, the number of Indeps decreased . 
The  flighty  nature  of  its  members,  gradual  attrition, 
biased arrests  by lawful organizations, and, some  even 
say, a mysterious plague weakened the ranks of the Free 
League . Yet, with their decentralized membership and lack 
of communication, few Indeps ever noticed the thinning 
of their ranks .
  In recent memory, several leaders have appeared among 
the group, specifically a skilled bard, Bria Tomay, and a 
pair of twin wemics, Lethea and Lesander . Noticing the 
disappearance of their friends from the streets and alleys 
of the Great Bazaar, the focal point of the faction’s influ-
ence in Sigil, these charismatic leaders set to organizing 
secret meetings among their fellows with the hopes of 
discovering the reason .
  Bria and the wemics never found their answer, though . 
Each of the trio was banished to an inescapable extradi-
mensional maze by the Lady of Pain in the first days of 
the chaotic Faction War, when all factions were ultimately 
exiled  from  Sigil .  By  the  war’s  culmination,  the  Free 
League’s  leaders  were  lost  and  its  members  banished 
from the City of Doors . This situation meant little to the 
Indeps,  though .  Their  ideology  blended  well  with  the 
purely natural plane of the Outlands, and cast-off members 
found a new home there, while countless others relocated 
to other planes and Material worlds, ultimately spreading 
their group’s dogma . Many even remained in Sigil, claim-
ing that the Free League had never been much of a true 
faction to begin with . Though they removed their badges, 
they did not change their ways . Even now, after all the 
Free League has experienced, the group is little different 
from what it was when the dragon devouring itself was 
first seen centuries ago .

11
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
 NPC Reactions: Members of the Free League are usu-
ally either well accepted or ignored . Because the group 
has  no  formal  opinions  and  performs  no  official  acts, 
no  one  can  really  approve  or  disapprove  of  its  doings . 
Thus,  people’s  opinions  of  the  organization  stem  from 
their experiences with specific Indeps they’ve known or 
heard about . Since league members keep to themselves or 
seek out ways to promote free thought, Indeps are at best 
considered free spirits and beneficent philosophers, and 
at worst vagabonds and troublemakers .
  While these are the opinions of commoners, some in 
positions of power see the Free League as a significant 
threat . Tyrants paint Indeps as rabble-rousers, anarchists, 
and regicides, and imprison or assassinate anyone wearing 
the Free League dragon .
free league lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) or Knowledge 
(the planes) can research the Free League to learn more 
about it . When a character succeeds on a skill check, the 
following lore is revealed, including the information from 
lower DCs .
 DC 10: The Free League is a group of freedom fighters 
and fiercely independent individuals . Members are quick 
to speak out against unjust laws, controlling politicians, 
and corrupt regimes .
 DC 15: The Free League has no central base or leader-
ship, just a large body of similarly minded members . These 
members call themselves Independents, or Indeps .
 DC 20: The Free League was once one of the factions that 
controlled the planar metropolis of Sigil . It was recently 
banished, however, along with all the other factions, and 
now many Indeps make their home in the gatetown of 
Tradegate on the Outlands .
 DC 30:  Characters  who  achieve  this  level  of  success 
can learn important details about specific Indeps in your 
campaign, including their recent works and the areas they 
frequent .
  Setting up a meeting with an Indep is often as easy as 
coming across one on the road or entering one’s shop . In 
areas where personal freedoms are oppressed and mem-
bers of the Free League are forced underground, the best 
chance of finding a group leader is in seeking out agitators, 
rebel cells, and places branded with graffiti of the Indep 
dragon .
free league Territory
The  Free  League  claims  no  territory  aside  from  those 
homes, shops, and lands under the ownership of its mem-
bers, and it guards those fiercely . The greatest numbers 
of Indeps, however, are on the Concordant Domain of 
the Outlands . There, on the plane of absolute neutrality, 
the live-and-let-live attitude of the Free League is not just 
accepted, it fundamentally suffuses the fabric of the very 
land    . Indeps and their symbols can be found in almost 
every settlement across the plane, but the largest com-
munity resides in the faction’s newly adopted home, the 
gate town of Tradegate . Surrounding a permanent portal 

12
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
to the neutral good-aligned plane of Bytopia, Tradegate 
embodies the spirit of openness, freedom, and communal 
aid that members of the Free League believe in so fervently . 
From here, and through the countless other portals scat-
tered across the Outlands, Indeps travel to innumerable 
places on the Material Plane, making their homes where 
they choose and where they are needed .
Indeps in the game
The Free League allows for a connection to the greater 
world, even the multiverse, in even the quietest burg . 
With  its  vast  membership  and  appealing  tenets,  the 
league  gives  the  simplest  commoner  on  the  Material 
Plane a reason to know about happenings on the Outer 
Planes and perhaps even knowledge of how a party might 
become involved .
  Indeps are also the first to chafe under a strict govern-
ment . Even if you don’t want to involve your campaign in 
planar concerns, the Free League makes a perfect, world-
spanning  rebellious  organization  quick  to  act  against 
tyrants and plan all manner of dissent . Rebellion-minded 
Indeps often work in secret and thus might use PCs, par-
ticularly scoundrels, for any number of subtle, subversive, 
or disruptive goals .
 Adaptation: With very few changes, the Free League 
can  be  adapted  to  nearly  any  campaign .  Stripping  the 
group of its planar connection allows you to involve PCs 
in freedom-fighting adventures without becoming side-
tracked by the potential of the Outer Planes . You might 
also want to provide league members with some means of 
magical communication, allowing members to organize 
and work against injustice in a more focused, effective 
manner across an entire world . An interesting variant is 
to make the Free League a kind of planar “Underground 
Railroad,” smuggling the oppressed and exploited though 
a series of safe houses to a planar gate leading to ultimate 
freedom, worlds away from any pursuit .
 Sample Encounter: PCs might become involved with 
the Free League in a multitude of ways, whether through 
merely hearing about the group from a traveling member, 
becoming involved in a fight against a tyrannical govern-
ment, or following the league’s exile from Sigil .
 EL 14: Valek Xander was once a recruiter for the league 
but left Sigil along with so many other Indeps . He decided 
to do a bit of wandering through the multiverse and see 
whatever it had to offer . He made his way to several worlds, 
touting the Free League’s tenets, and eventually ended up 
in a large but oppressed city where his open philosophizing 
was taken as rabble-rousing . He was swiftly imprisoned . 
Calling upon the aid of a friendly steam mephit named 
Huozodruzil, the Indep instructed the little outsider to 
find some free-minded individuals in the city to help him 
escape . As luck would have it, the mephit stumbles across 
the PCs .
Valek Xander CR 14
Male tiefling rogue 8/gatecrasher 5*
 *Prestige class from Manual of the Planes
CG Medium outsider (native)
Init +7; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Listen +8, Spot +12
Languages	Abyssal, Celestial, Common, Ignan, Infernal
AC 20, touch 13, flat-footed 17; Dodge, Mobility, improved 
uncanny dodge
 (+3 Dex, +5 armor, +2 natural)
hp 48 (13 HD)
Resist	cold 5, electricity 5, fire 5; evasion
Fort +3, Ref +15, Will +8
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee	+2 silvered rapier +11 (1d6+1/18–20)
Ranged	+1 anarchic light crossbow +15 (1d8+1/19–20)
Base	Atk	+9; Grp	+9
Atk	Options sneak attack +4d6
Special	Actions summon spell dampening 3/day
Combat	Gear potion of haste, wand of cat’s grace (33 charges)
Spell-Like	Abilities (CL 14th):
 5/day—analyze portal*
	1/day—darkness
 *Spell described in Manual of the Planes
Abilities	Str 11, Dex 16, Con 10, Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 15
SQ open portal, trap sense +2, trapfinding
Valek Xander, an Indep
Illus. by E. Deschamps

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
Feats Dodge, Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes, Mobil-
ity, Run
Skills Appraise +5, Balance +7, Bluff +23, Decipher Script 
+5, Diplomacy +25, Disable Device +7, Disguise +10 (+12 
acting), Gather Information +16, Hide +5, Intimidate +6, 
Jump +2, Knowledge (local) +13, Knowledge (the planes) 
+11, Listen +8, Move Silently +11, Open Lock +20, Sense 
Motive +16, Spot +12, Survival +2 (+4 on other planes), 
Tumble +15, Use Magic Device +12
Possessions combat gear plus +3 leather armor, +2 silvered 
rapier, +1 anarchic light crossbow with 40 bolts, amulet 
of natural armor +2, ring of freedom of movement, rod of 
flame extinguishing, potion of water breathing, masterwork 
thieves’ tools, pendant with the symbol of the Free League
Summon	Spell	Dampening	(Su) Conjuration (summoning) 
and (calling) spells are suppressed within 100 feet of 
Valek for 10 rounds.
Open	Portal	(Su)	As a full-round action, Valek can force open 
a planar gate or portal by making a successful Open Lock 
check, using his Int modifier instead of his Dex modifier. 
The portal remains open for 1d4+1 rounds.
The blInd ToWer
“If you sign on the dotted line, you can consider it as good as done.”
—Mistress Eve, Blind Tower agent, closing a deal
The  Blind  Tower  began  with  a  crime  spree  that  never 
ended . More than thirty years ago a single, daring cat bur-
glar ransacked scores of heavily guarded vaults and noble 
treasuries . Today, that famous rogue leads an empire that 
has stretched beyond mere prowling and larceny, becom-
ing an army of the most skilled and professional thieves, 
daredevils,  adventurers,  and  assassins  ever  organized . 
The Blind Tower commands a view of the entire world’s 
intrigues, but within its own walls it sees nothing at all .
Joining the blind Tower
The Blind Tower has need for talented characters of all 
types . Because the group prides itself on its versatility 
and ability to accomplish any goal, any exceptional indi-
vidual with a willingness to accept daring—if morally 
questionable—missions might excel as an agent of the 
Blind Tower .
Entry Requirements
Base attack bonus +3 OR
Any four skills 6 ranks each OR
Ability to cast 2nd-level spells.
Special: Must have completed an act of skill great enough 
to have attracted the attention of the Blind Tower.
Special: Must have completed an introductory mission for 
the Blind Tower.
The Blind Tower exists as a dual business venture and 
information network for its founder, Mister Dark . Aside 
from this, it allows some of the most talented and daring 
individuals in the world to test and improve their skills 
while making a tidy profit, regardless of their professions . 
Diverse  talents  both  mundane  and  extraordinary  are 
required to accomplish all the missions the organization 
is  hired  to  perform .  Fighter  or  cleric,  rogue  or  mage, 
nearly anyone with the ability to keep a secret and skills 
considered “Blind Tower quality” might become a useful 
member of this elusive organization .
  The Blind Tower doesn’t insist that every agent serve it 
exclusively, although those who wish to do so can usually 
find enough work from its missions alone . The organiza-
tion encourages members to go out and spread the word 
of its prowess by example .
blind Tower agent benefits
The Blind Tower realizes that its members require sup-
port, information, and the best equipment available to 
complete assignments others might consider impossible . 
Thus, agents of the Blind Tower have access to a wide 
range of benefits .
 Gear: The organization’s main arsenal can be found at 
the Blind Tower itself (see Headquarters, page 136) . Nearly 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
CasIng The bank
1st	Night
•    Bank closes, 5 bells—last customer leaves minutes later
•       Employees: two female humans, one male gnome, one male 
dwarf; leave half-hour after closing
•    Manager, male dwarf, leaves after 7 bells
•     No traffic 7 to 8 bells
•    Beggar sleeps on step, just before 9 bells
•    No traffic 10 to 11 bells
•    Bar around corner starts to empty just before midnight
2nd	Night
•    Same close, same departures
•    Light traffic 7 to 8, no traffic 8 to 9
•    Beggar sleeps on step, just after 9 bells
•    Light to no traffic 10 to 11 bells
3rd	Night
•    Same close, employees stay longer, empty by 7 bells
•    No traffic 7 to 9 bells
•    Light traffic 9 to 10 bells, beggar arrives but leaves
•    No traffic 10 to 11
4th	Night
•    All employees leave by 7 bells
•    No traffic 7 to 8 bells
•    Light traffic after 8 bells—festival?
5th	Night
•    Same close, employees stay to 6 bells
•    Looks same—beggar? Seems gone
6th	Night
•    Nothing new to report—recommend go with plan

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
any weapon of masterwork quality, even several of magical 
nature, might be found in the group’s stores, along with 
armor,  adventuring  gear,  and  minor,  reusable  magic 
items . A member can, at any time, borrow up to 3,000 gp 
worth of equipment from the Blind Tower . These items 
are considered to be on loan for one mission and must be 
returned upon its completion .
  As a character grows in experience and influence, he 
might  be  afforded  special  permission  to  take  items  of 
greater  value  from  the  group’s  stores,  but  always  with 
the stipulation that such resources be returned so other 
members can later make use of them . The Blind Tower 
does not lend out single-use magic items or alchemical 
gear    . Equipment is to be borrowed only for use on missions 
assigned by the Blind Tower .
  Besides the stores in the Blind Tower itself, the orga-
nization maintains small troves of gear in other cities . 
Tower agents who succeed on a DC 20 Knowledge (local) 
check  know  the  location  of  the  nearest  cache .  These 
stores usually hold 5,000 gp worth of equipment . Just 
as  at  the  Blind  Tower,  these  troves  are  monitored  by 
their guardians, and anyone who makes use of them is 
expected to return what they take . The contents of these 
caches are variable and might even include single-use 
items . Those who borrow from these troves can replace 
items  with  gear  of  equal  value  if  they  cannot  return 
exactly what they borrowed .
 Services: Blind Tower agents might take advantage of 
their fellow members’ skills in a variety of fields . Though 
many are quite profit-minded in their dealings, even with 
other members, Blind Tower agents usually offer other 
agents a 50% discount on their services .
 Information: The Blind Tower has agents spread all 
over  the  world  who  make  regular  reports  containing 
useful information . Any Blind Tower agent who makes a 
Knowledge check at the Blind Tower headquarters gains 
the benefit of her peers’ vast and varied experience and 
information, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus . This bonus 
increases to +5 for Knowledge (geography) and Knowledge 
(local) checks .
 Status: Agents of the Blind Tower gain a +2 circum-
stance bonus on interactions with members of organized 
criminal groups and with wealthy or noble individuals 
not directly related to the government .
Playing a blind Tower agent
Agents of the Blind Tower are the best at what they do 
and  have  been  accepted  into  the  organization  for  that 
reason .  Given  a  place  where  they  can  continually  test 
and improve upon their skills, as well as draw on near-
unlimited resources, agents are expected to offer their 
services to any employer willing to pay . The Blind Tower 
also demands complete discretion about a member’s fellow 
agents,  the  group’s  resources  and  holdings,  and  their 
employer’s privacy .
  Unemotional and secretive, even with fellow members, 
few within the Blind Tower could say that they’re friends 
with their peers . While there are some exceptions, espe-
cially in the case of those who work well together and team 
up regularly, the organization is run strictly as a business, 
with the completion of missions and the furthering of 
group goals taking precedence over any individual .
  All members of the Blind Tower are mercenaries . As an 
agent, you must eventually decide how far you are willing 
to go in service to the group . A skilled thief might have 
little problem with breaking into countless homes of the 
rich  and  pompous,  but  turning  those  larcenous  skills 
against  the  truly  needy  merely  to  complete  a  mission 
might cause that same thief to question her allegiance . 
Sometimes you have to choose between your ethical code 
and a lucrative but immoral order, such as kidnapping 
or assassination—even if saying no means turning your 
allies into enemies and earning the wrath of a powerful 
and far-reaching organization .
 Combat: Blind Tower operatives avoid combat as often 
as possible . In situations when battle becomes necessary, 
they end such encounters as swiftly and as quietly as they 
can   . Sometimes a specific mission calls for the retrieval of 
wayward individuals, in which case members seek ways 
to incapacitate their targets harmlessly .
 Advancement: Only those with remarkable skill and 
promise are brought into the ranks of the Blind Tower . 
Potential members do not simply join; they’re selected . 
Those who demonstrate exceptional talent and a capac-
ity for subtlety, loyalty, and discretion are sought out by 
high-ranking agents of the Tower, who hire the prospect 
to fulfill some trying mission . Ideally, this mission tests 
several aspects of the would-be member’s abilities . Always, 
it puts him in a position that tries his prudence and abil-
ity to keep a secret . The mission is often a scam, with the 
destination and people involved all being assets of the 
Blind Tower . Those who pass the trial receive a letter of 
congratulations, signed by Mister Dark, with directions 
to the elusive organization’s headquarters .
  Although most of its members are chosen, a rare few seek 
out the Blind Tower in hope of gaining entry . This act is a 
feat in itself, and those who successfully reach the tower 
gate alive are considered for membership if that is what 
they wish . Those lacking talent, however, and those who 
do not wish to join often become food for the abundant 
local alligators .
  Each  member  receives  a  name,  often  a  relevant  yet 
nondescript item prefaced by the honorific “Mister” or 
“Mistress”  (such  as  Mister  Wand,  Mistress  Balcony,  or 
Mister Axe) . After joining the Blind Tower, agents are never 
referred to by their real names . No rank or distinction 
exists among members, although those with greater age, 
ability, and experience merit greater respect among the 
group’s ranks . The three most senior members serve as the 
day-to-day leaders of the organization: stern and intimidat-
ing Mister Tower, charming and seductive Mistress Eve, 

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
and cruel, poison-loving Mister Dagger . This trio is second 
only to Mister Dark himself, and they are the only ones 
allowed into his private sanctum (see Structure, below) .
 Missions:  Individual  members  or  small  groups  are 
regularly sent out on specific missions, prearranged by 
another member who was likely assigned to set up such 
tasks . All missions are assigned by Mister Tower, Mistress 
Eve, or Mister Dagger . These missions often involve retriev-
ing lost items or stealing back stolen goods, finding (and 
sometimes kidnapping) “lost” parties, breaking into vaults 
to test their defenses, and spying . Members are not allowed 
to take anything from the target other than what they’ve 
been sent to acquire, no matter what else is available, unless 
the contract so stipulates . 
 Responsibilities: Above all other duties, members of 
the Blind Tower are expected to be discreet . No matter 
how potentially lucrative the revelation might be, they 
must keep the secrets of their employers, of discoveries 
made on missions, and of the Tower itself . Those who 
breach this barrier of professional secrecy might become 
the targets of their peers’ next assignments .
The blind Tower in the World
“We didn’t see anything we weren’t paid to.”
—Mister Tower, after successfully testing and 
overcoming the defenses of the royal vault
The Blind Tower is a two-faced organization . It hires out 
talent to those who lawfully seek the abilities of skilled 
detectives and daredevils, but it also provides cunning 
bounty  hunters,  thieves,  and  brigands  to  anyone  with 
enough coin to pay . Thus the Blind Tower’s services fall 
within a moral and legal gray area, and might aid the truly 
desperate as often as the truly criminal . Members and 
those who employ the organization alike face the quandary 
of being involved with the best in the business, despite the 
moral questions raised by the group’s mercenary nature .
 Structure: Thirty years ago, the famed Halzo family 
sapphires went missing in what was called a daring rob-
bery    . A week later, the holy and penetrating Eyes of Wee 
Jas vanished in an incredible heist . And when the royally 
guarded golden bodies of the Seven Icons of the Sphinx 
were absconded with, everyone spoke of the “crime spree of 
the century .” No one knew who was stealing the finest and 
most valuable art objects in the capital, but gone they were, 
and even the finest detective work and the most powerful 
divinations were unable to find a suspect . Finally even the 
royal vault was infiltrated . Though the thief chose to take 
the original Illustrated Symphony of Tvash-Prull instead of 
a library of military and royal dirty secrets, at that point 
the crime spree became a matter of national concern .
  For nearly a year, no treasure was safe . Millions of gold 
pieces’ worth of fine art disappeared . A few reports of a 
suspicious-looking, shadowy form near the scenes of the 
crimes gave rise to stories about the “dark man .” Eventually 
as the unstoppable thief’s exploits were practically serial-
ized in weekly broadsheets, this elusive figure became 
known among the public as “Mister Dark .”
  Then suddenly, less than a month before the anniversary 
of his first theft, Mister Dark’s crime wave inexplicably 
stopped . Rumors variously claimed that the master burglar 
had been quietly captured and imprisoned, disintegrated 
without a trace while infiltrating some noble’s vault, or 
met with an even more outlandish ends to explain the 
spree’s apparent cessation . Regardless of the reason, art 
collectors, curators, wealthy families, and guards across the 
city breathed easier with Mister Dark’s disappearance . 
  At least they did until four years ago .
  In one night nearly every criminal organization, shrine 
of Olidammara, and noble family with illicit dealings 
received a formal letter of introduction from a mysterious 
organization calling itself the Blind Tower . This group 
offered the services of its skilled and discreet members 
as retrievers of lost items, testers of defenses and security 
systems, information gatherers, and bounty hunters for 
The Blind Tower
Illus. by H. Lyon

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
hire   . The letters offered no means of contracting the strange 
organization, but each was signed “Mister Dark .” Questions 
of authenticity were soon dismissed: Those who honestly 
sought the organization’s services were soon contacted, 
while governmental searches were wholly unsuccessful .
  The Blind Tower’s reach expands beyond the boundaries 
of any one country . Someone seeking its services need 
merely make his intentions publicly known, usually by 
inquiring openly about the group . Those whose needs 
are judged legitimate—and worthy of the Blind Tower’s 
service—are approached by a formally garbed and charm-
ing representative named with the honorific “Mister” or 
“Mistress .” This person considers the would-be employer’s 
needs and sets the group’s terms and price, to be paid in 
advance . The cost is exorbitant, but the Blind Tower prom-
ises success within one week and absolute discretion . If 
the organization is unable to fulfill its side of the bargain, 
the employer receives his total investment back along with 
the failed and renounced agent or agents, to do with as he 
pleases . So far, though, the Blind Tower has never failed .
  The Blind Tower is a strange combination of thieves’ 
guild and spy network for hire, so efficient that even fami-
lies and empires once wronged by its founder have made 
use of its services . Every job expands the group’s resources 
and growing influence . Yet why the Blind Tower exists 
remains a mystery . Some whisper that the organization is 
merely a front for a crime so complex, so incredible that 
even the invincible Mister Dark has spent thirty years in 
its planning .
 NPC Reactions: Few besides the criminal and social 
elite even know the Blind Tower exists, and among both 
of these groups opinions vary . The wealthy and noble hold 
the opinion that the Blind Tower is nothing more than a 
thieves’ guild playing at respectability, though all hold 
their purse strings a little tighter when they speak ill of 
the group . Criminals either respect and envy the organi-
zation for its quiet efficiency, or see it as holier-than-thou 
competition that could use its pretty face smeared in the 
mud    .
 Headquarters: The illicit empire takes its name from 
the ominous and elusive structure called the Blind Tower . 
Located deep within a swamp upon a marshy hillock, it 
was once a border fortress for some long-forgotten empire . 
The squat, eight-story tower juts from the ruins of a larger 
building, overgrown with vines and ages of swampy decay . 
The scars of an ancient fire still mar its stone, making it 
look disused and abandoned . Within, the Blind Tower 
has no floors, the wooden interiors long since decayed 
and cleared away . Instead, the interior is an incredibly 
intricate  mesh  of  scaffolds,  knotted  ropes,  hammocks, 
and  poles  in  which  the  tower’s  members  train,  report, 
rest, and leave with hardly a sound . Permanent magical 
effects  cover  large  swaths  of  the  vast  space,  including 
alarm spells, areas of perpetual silence, and banks of mist 
and darkness . The most noteworthy magic occupies one 
of the tower’s top corners, where a rickety-looking scaffold 
offers access to a flimsy plank door . Within is a permanent 
Mordenkainen’s magnificent mansion, where the members of 

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
the inner circle plot and deal, and where the elusive Mister 
Dark purportedly makes his home .
  The grounds, hill, and marshes surrounding the Blind 
Tower  are  riddled  with  discarded  statuary  stolen  from 
temples, castles, ancient ruins, and any number of other 
sites    . Scattered and awkwardly placed, these sculptures 
make  the  area  around  the  already  sinister  tower  look 
like a massive, forgotten graveyard . These statues were 
acquired expressly at Mister Dark’s request, a product of 
the master thief’s grim sense of aesthetics, but some say, 
also to disguise the tower’s hidden guardians .
  The  region  around  the  Blind  Tower  is  constantly 
patrolled by hidden members, usually initiates training 
in stealth, but also a number of deadly wilderness masters . 
The traps laid by practicing members, as well as the natural 
hazards of the swamp, make a single boggy and constantly 
watched road the only practical path to the Blind Tower .
blind Tower lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (history) and Knowl-
edge (local) can research the Blind Tower to learn more 
about it . When a character succeeds on a skill check, the 
following lore is revealed, including the information from 
lower DCs .
 DC 15: The Blind Tower is a group of investigators, spies, 
housebreakers, daredevils, and thieves-for-hire that prides 
itself on discretion in performing illegal and semilegal 
activities .  Anyone  who  makes  serious  inquiries  about 
hiring its services is soon approached by a member, ready 
to discuss terms of a contract .
 DC 20:  The  Blind  Tower  is  supposedly  funded  and 
run by the master criminal Mister Dark, who went on an 
unstoppable crime spree thirty years ago .
 DC 25: All members of the Blind Tower have strange 
and distinctive names, such as Mistress Picks or Mister 
Gallows .
 DC 30:  Characters  who  achieve  this  level  of  success 
learn of the organization’s recent missions and successes, 
hear gossip about who might be members of the group, 
and might even piece together hints about the location of 
the Blind Tower itself .
  To meet with a member of the Blind Tower, all one must 
do is openly inquire about contacting the group anywhere 
frequented  by  criminals  and  the  well-informed .  If  the 
inquirer and the task are deemed worthy of the group’s 
attention, an agent of the Tower pays a visit to the potential 
employer soon after .
blind Tower agents in the game
Only recently organized and operating in the shadows, 
the Blind Tower might well have been working behind 
the scenes of your campaign all along . The organization is 
purposely elusive and caters only to the worthy and elite, so 
it might seek to hire PCs for missions or even recruit them 
after some display of extraordinary skill . Alternatively, the 
PCs might be hired by some group with a long memory or 
that wishes the return of an item stolen by Mister Dark, 
which could lead them to confront one of the most secre-
tive criminal organizations in the world .
 Adaptation:  Any  number  of  small  adjustments  can 
make the Blind Tower better suit your game . It’s quite 
possible that Mister Dark has nothing to do with the Blind 
Tower and that his name is merely being used by his three 
supposed lieutenants . Alternatively, Mister Tower, Mistress 
Eve, and Mister Dagger might be Mister Dark’s apprentices 
or children and continue his work, communing in a magi-
cal sanctum that is in fact an extraplanar tomb .
  The Blind Tower might also be the contract spy agency 
of a national government, or could serve any government 
for the right price . The group might even be a cover for 
more  sinister  deals,  performing  semibenevolent  work 
to hide its vast information-gathering about some great 
conspiracy or world secret .
 Sample Encounter: The easiest way to become involved 
with the Blind Tower is through an agent of that group 
who has heard about and been impressed by some of the 
past exploits of the PCs . The agent might have a mission 
for the characters, whether to see just how good they are 
or to test them as part of some sort of Tower plot .
  Alternatively, if the PCs have caught the eye of someone 
important or robbed a powerful individual, the Blind 
Tower now stalks the party to collect information or 
retrieve its employer’s possessions .
 EL 7: The PCs find that the Blind Tower has been watch-
ing them . After some particularly daring stunt or lucrative 
haul, one of the party members is stopped on the street by 
a beautiful woman with short-cropped blonde hair . Smil-
ing, she informs the PC that she’s been waiting for him, 
congratulates him on a job well done, hands him a letter, 
and leans in to kiss him on the cheek . The physicality 
lets her get close enough to use Sleight of Hand to steal 
something valuable from him before she slips away . The 
letter details a mission and is signed “Mister Dark .” This 
mission, of course, is a sham arranged by the Blind Tower 
and is meant to test the PCs, as is the theft of the target’s 
item   . The elusive Mistress Eve slips away, reappearing in 
a different guise to induct another member elsewhere .
Mistress Eve CR 7
Female human bard 4/rogue 3
N Medium humanoid
Init +2; Senses Listen +6, Spot +6
Languages	Common, Undercommon
AC 16, touch 12, flat-footed 14; Dodge, Mobility
 (+2 Dex, +3 armor, +1 deflection)
hp 34 (7 HD)
Resist	evasion
Fort +3, Ref +9, Will +7
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee short sword +6 (1d6+1/19–20)
Ranged +1 light crossbow +8 (1d8+1/19–20)
Base	Atk	+5; Grp	+6
Atk	Options Combat Reflexes, sneak attack +2d6

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
Special	Actions bardic music 4/day (countersong, fascinate 2 
creatures, inspire competence, inspire courage +1)
Combat	Gear potion of aid, potion of cure moderate wounds, 
potion of displacement
Bard	Spells	Known	(CL 4th):
 2nd (1/day)—cat’s grace, detect thoughts (DC 15)
1st (3/day)—charm person (DC 14), disguise self, undetect-
able alignment
0 (3/day)—dancing lights, ghost sound, know direction, lul-
laby (DC 13), mage hand, message
Abilities	Str 13, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 17
SQ bardic knowledge +5, trap sense +1, trapfinding
Feats Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility, Stealthy
Skills Bluff +11, Diplomacy +11, Disguise +3 (+5 acting), 
Escape Artist +6, Gather Information +9, Hide +10, 
Intimidate +5, Knowledge (arcana) +6, Knowledge (local) 
+11, Knowledge (nature) +6, Listen +6, Move Silently 
+8, Perform (string instruments) +11, Sense Motive +12, 
Sleight of Hand +10, Spellcraft +4, Spot +6, Survival 
+4 (+6 aboveground natural environments), Use Magic 
Device +5
Possessions combat gear plus +1 leather armor, short sword, 
+1 light crossbow with 30 crossbow bolts, ring of protection 
+1, masterwork violin 
seven ravens Clan
“A child can snap a single twig, but not even a giant can snap 
a bundle.”
—Seven Ravens Clan teaching
An import from distant and exotic lands, the Seven Ravens 
Clan uses the techniques and tactics of the lawless and 
corrupt  to  combat  the  same .  The  clan’s  members  fight 
an ongoing and seemingly hopeless war against thieves’ 
guilds, assassins’ guilds, crime families, and other powerful 
underworld organizations .
Joining the seven ravens Clan
Those  who  join  the  Seven  Ravens  Clan  do  so  because 
they have a score to settle or they seek vigilante justice . 
Because of the organization’s secretive ways, those classes 
with an appreciation for stealth and subtlety make up the 
largest percentage of its members . Ninjas, rangers, rogues, 
and scouts form almost two-thirds of the clan, with the 
remaining  third  spread  out  over  other  classes  (mainly 
clerics of trickster deities, fighters, monks, and sorcerers) . 
Barbarians and paladins almost never join the clan, since 
they typically lack any pretense at subtlety .
Entry Requirements
Alignment: Any non-evil.
Skills: Hide 2 ranks, Knowledge (local) 2 ranks.
Special: Must have been directly victimized by a criminal 
organization (such as being assaulted or robbed) or be 
the relative, lover, or close friend of someone killed by 
a criminal organization. Must be able to prove such a 
crime and be willing to undergo a battery of magical tests, 
beginning with a zone of truth spell.
Originally a criminal organization in its own right, the 
Seven Ravens Clan now violently opposes such groups, 
acting as a sort of anti-thieves’ guild . Its ninjas and rogues 
infiltrate  underworld  organizations  to  glean  inside 
information, and its rangers and scouts perform external 
reconnaissance . Once the intelligence-gathering groups 
(usually pairs or trios) return, the clan draws up plans for 
assault and then sends in small squads of fast-moving, 
hard-hitting specialists . Often led by one of the stealthier 
clan members who gathered intelligence, an assault squad 
usually  also  contains  two  fighters  or  monks,  a  divine 
spellcaster, an arcane spellcaster, and sometimes another 
stealthy member (usually of a different class from that of 
the expedition’s leader) .
seven ravens Clan benefits
Fellowship and revenge appeal strongly to clan members . 
Having been victimized before, those who join the Seven 
Ravens Clan wish to not only guard themselves from such 
pain in the future but also to return similar pain upon 
those who originally hurt them . Every member of the 
clan has suffered at the hands of criminals, and so every 
member is expected to help out her fellows . This help 
might come in the form of active physical guardianship 
or a discount on food or other essentials .
 Services: The clan’s leadership fondly repeats the clan’s 
first principle (see the sidebar for a complete list of the 
clan’s teachings) . A member who needs to run an errand 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
The Ten TeaChIngs 
of The seven ravens
Members of the Seven Ravens Clan learn these ten teachings by 
heart. These define the organization and what is expected of its 
members. Some of the teachings are credited to the clan’s cur-
rent leader, Katsuo Golddragon, but others come from a longer 
pedigree,  reaching  back  to  the  ancestral  home  of  Katsuo’s 
forefathers. Many of them emphasize working together and not 
giving enemies an opportunity to attack. 
 1. A child can snap a single twig, but not even a giant can snap 
a bundle.
    2. If you lose a knife, turn your back on a foe and he will surely 
give you a new one.
    3. Sing your thanks; swallow your complaints. 
    4. A dragon hoards and dies alone but wealthy. A generous 
man dies poor but surrounded by friends. Who then is richer?
    5.  When  a  single  pebble  comes  loose  it  can  bring  down  an 
entire mountain.
    6. Look for friends among those you meet and you shall find 
them. The same holds true for enemies.
    7.  Trust  your  friends  to  support  you  when  you  can’t  sup-
port  yourself.  Trust  your  enemies  to  hurt  you  when  you  hurt 
already.
    8. Walk alone, die alone. Walk with friends, live with friends.
    9. Honor those who served before you, for their spirits might 
yet linger nearby.
    10. It is better to live for the clan than to die for the clan.

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
or otherwise venture away from a safe house can always 
request a companion or escort, no matter the time . In a 
dangerous area, such as a city in which the clan is in open 
war against a criminal organization, clan members must 
travel in groups no smaller than four . The clan maintains a 
friendly relationship with the nonmilitary guards of towns 
and cities, and it often can call upon such law enforcers 
when a member is in dire need .
 Knowledge: While the clan occasionally puts together 
large or intricately planned assaults on criminal strong-
holds, it also encourages its members to take the initiative 
in  fighting  the  lawless  and  corrupt .  It  freely  provides 
information on thieves’ guilds, crime families, and even 
dark cults to its members, as well as necessary training . 
Members of the Seven Ravens Clan can find high-level 
members of nearly every class to assist them with honing 
their abilities . 
 Discounts: The Seven Ravens Clan does not keep silent 
about the missions it performs . Whenever the city guards 
discover known members of thieves’ or assassins’ guilds, 
often subdued and bound, the clan is quick to make sure 
everyone knows who was responsible . As a result, grate-
ful and loyal merchants happily discount their wares for 
clan members who provide proof of their affiliation . This 
discount usually amounts to 10%, but senior members of 
the clan can sometimes receive as much as 50% off the 
normal price .
Playing a seven ravens Clan Member
Two very different philosophies govern the actions of a 
Seven Ravens Clan member . The first, reactive guardian-
ship, constitutes both a boon and burden . Members must 
always help protect a fellow clan member in peril, but 
fellow members must also always assist them . If an assas-
sin attacks one of the clan, his employer attacks all of the 
clan   . The second philosophy, proactive opposition, pits 
members forever against the evil and the lawless . Whether 
working in a small group of fellow clan members, alone, 
or with a group of nonclan allies, they constantly seek out 
new information about underworld organizations .
  Teamwork, mutual protection, and the safety of numbers 
become a part of your mindset after joining the Seven 
Ravens Clan . Adventuring groups turn to the clan for 
trustworthy  individuals  with  the  talent  and  skills  for 
stealth  and  subterfuge .  Your  skills  are  always  in  high 
demand, and your affiliation with the clan increases your 
desirability . City guard organizations also recruit from the 
clan, for the same reasons .
  You seek revenge . The clan wants to help you get it . You 
look for small ways to exact your vengeance, and you look 
forward to the time when the clan raids the establishments 
of those who wronged you .
 Combat: The Seven Ravens Clan is all about combat . 
Members support one another in a fight, in whatever way 
suits the situation . If a significant number of allies face 
melee combat, others move in close to aid them: The faster 
foes drop, the less damage they can deal collectively . Clan 
members with the ability to make precision-based attacks 
move into the best position, with others helping them set 
up flanks . Otherwise, members render aid to helpless or 
unconscious allies . Known members of thieves’ or assas-
sins’ guilds are always the first targets . The Seven Ravens 
Clan never lets bandits, brigands, and the like escape alive 
if at all possible . 
 Advancement: All members of the Seven Ravens Clan 
understand loss . Thieves might have stolen everything a 
member once owned, or a murderer slaughtered a member’s 
family . Loss comes in many forms, and the clan welcomes 
all victims as members . A member of the clan might have 
approached you after a tragedy to offer you sympathy and 
a chance for revenge .
  Because it attacks criminal organizations with their own 
tactics, the Seven Ravens Clan provides training in what 
law-enforcing  organizations  consider  illicit  (or  at  least 
shady) skills: lockpicking, stealthy movement, aiming for 
vital locations, and so on . People with no talent for stealth 
and subtlety still find a place in the clan, but they are asked 
to join missions far less often .
 Missions:  Missions  for  the  clan  consist  of  either 
reconnaissance or assault . Whether through careful and 
repetitive observation or by the use of divination magic, 
a reconnaissance mission’s main objective is to observe 
how an organization works, often by tailing a known or 
suspected member, and to identify any changes in behavior 
(possibly indicating that the organization knows it is being 
watched) . Once the exploratory teams have gathered the 
needed intelligence, assault squads move in .
  Your abilities dictate what types of missions you are 
typically  assigned,  although  to  keep  enemies  guessing 
you might sometimes play a supporting role in a mission 
for which you have no talent or little ability . For the most 
part, though, the clan’s leadership ensures that its members 
play to their strengths .
 Responsibilities: A clan member’s responsibilities are 
simple: Come when called . You might one day get your 
chance to take on a specific organization or individual, 
but until then you owe the clan your service in bringing 
down other groups .
The seven ravens Clan in the World
“They came at us just after dusk. We didn’t even know they were 
there until they attacked. In one night they wiped us out—us, our 
informants, our fences, everyone in the city connected to us.”
—”Lefty” Thrushbushel,  
Red Knives Thieves’ Gang survivor
Joining the Seven Ravens Clan provides a way for good-
aligned PCs to enter the criminal underworld without 
violating their alignments or personal moral codes . The 
clan even counts a few paladins (often gray guards; see page 

10
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
40) among its members . If your campaign offers multiple 
non-evil underworld organizations, the Seven Ravens Clan 
provides a touch of the exotic in its mysterious origins .
 Structure: Nearly ten years ago a caravan with a hun-
dred merchants, family members, and guards appeared on 
the horizon . The group settled at the outskirts of the area’s 
largest city and quickly made its presence known within 
the market . In less than three months the settlers had 
sold nearly everything they brought with them, including 
their elaborately carved wagons . They quickly became 
a welcome part of the local economy . 
  Few citizens suspected and fewer knew of the band’s 
dark intentions . Having gained the trust of the city’s 
inhabitants, the original Seven Ravens Clan secretly 
communicated with the underground elements in and 
around the urban area and established a seemingly 
healthy rapport . That ended one night when two 
of the city’s rival criminal guilds swept into the 
clan’s headquarters, abetted by one of its own 
council, slaughtering its leaders and most of its 
members .
  Those who survived the massacre 
swore  revenge  and  slowly  rebuilt 
their  organization .  The  clan’s  new 
leader,  Katsuo  Golddragon,  realized 
that the trust of the people the original 
leaders had planned to betray was actually the 
clan’s  greatest  strength .  Building  upon  that 
trust, the new Seven Ravens Clan recruited 
heavily  among  the  downtrodden,  the 
hopeless, and the abandoned . In a few 
months, Katsuo and his new council 
had  restored  much  of  the  clan’s 
strength  on  the  promise  of 
revenge against the criminal 
elements within the city . 
As  part  of  his  plan, 
Katsuo  turned  to 
the city’s legitimate 
rulers and made them 
honorary members .
  Katsuo now heads a 
council known as the Ravens-
watch,  comprising  six  members  called 
Ravens . Before the clan’s near destruction 
seven Ravens (including the leader) sat on 
the Ravenswatch, but when Katsuo learned 
that a Raven had betrayed the clan, he decided to reduce 
the council to its current size . Every Ravenswatch meeting 
still has seven chairs, with the empty seat reserved for the 
one Katsuo calls the Lost Raven—a representative and 
reminder of the treacherous act that nearly destroyed the 
clan   . Reinforcing the clan’s close ties with the city’s rulers 
and guards, a member of the city council and one of its 
captains of the guard secretly serve as Ravens . Katsuo’s 
childhood friend and current lover is another Raven, with 
the remaining two being other survivors of the surprise 
attack: a dwarf bard and a half-elf ninja .
  Below  the  Ravens  all  other  members  live  and  serve 
equally,  with  slight  preferential  treatment  provided  to 
those who prove themselves . Such recognition usually 
results in the clan member being asked to lead raids and 
occasionally deciding where such raids take place .
   The Seven Ravens Clan has branches in every 
town or city that also has an active criminal 
underground . The more powerful a thieves’ 
guild, the larger the clan’s presence 
in that area .
 NPC Reactions: Among the 
victims of crime and those who 
uphold the law, the Seven Ravens 
Clan is seen as a welcome savior . 
The  clan  is  not  quiet  about  its 
achievements, and known members 
receive friendly receptions from law-
abiding members of society . Conversely, 
the clan is hated and feared by criminal 
organizations,  and  known  members 
might  be  the  targets  of  assassination 
attempts . 
seven ravens Clan lore
Characters  with  ranks  in  Knowledge 
(local)  can  research  the  Seven  Ravens 
Clan  to  learn  more  about  it .  When  a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the 
following  lore  is  revealed,  including 
the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10:  The  clan  behaves  like  a 
thieves’ guild, but no one has ever 
heard of members actually commit-
ting a crime .
 DC 15:  The  clan  is  known  to 
attack  all  the  other  criminal  guilds, 
even in broad daylight . Sometimes 
members are seen talking to city 
guards on the streets .
 DC 20:  The  clan  used  to 
be a thieves’ guild, until it was 
betrayed and nearly destroyed . Now 
members work with the city guard to 
bring down criminal organizations .
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success 
know  important  details  about  the  Seven  Ravens  Clan, 
including  its  history,  requirements  for  membership, 
notable members (including the names of the four Ravens 
who don’t work for the city), the areas where it operates, 
and the kinds of activities it undertakes .
  If a PC has suffered a horrific loss at the hands of a 
thieves’ or assassins’ guild, a representative of the Seven 
Katsuo Golddragon,  
leader of the Seven Ravens Clan
Illus. by E. Widermann

11
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
Ravens clan might approach him . PCs can also contact 
the clan by circulating rumors through the underworld 
that they have a dispute with a criminal organization in 
town .
 Headquarters: Katsuo and the other five active Ravens 
periodically spend weeks, months, or years organizing 
branches of the Seven Ravens Clan in other cities, but 
the clan’s main base of operations is called the Rookery . 
Located roughly halfway between the guards’ barracks and 
the city’s worst slums, the Rookery is both physically and 
metaphorically a way station between the most and least 
lawful parts of town . The clan’s headquarters encompasses 
most of an entire city block, comprising walled-off back-
rooms and narrow corridors, hidden behind a dozen shops . 
An old but respectable-looking antiques and curios shop 
(called Taan’s Timeless Trinkets) is the Rookery’s main 
entrance . To throw off the clan’s enemies, Katsuo insists 
on allowing thieves to rob the shop on occasion . He even 
occasionally pays protection money for Taan’s whenever 
a new criminal organization pops up .
seven ravens Clan Members in the game
Members of the Seven Ravens Clan vary widely in appear-
ance and personality, but nearly all of them have the same 
unifying goal: vengeance . Some are content to watch the 
activities  of  thieves  and  other  underworld  figures  and 
report their observations to the clan leadership . Others 
take it upon themselves to kill known or suspected mem-
bers of criminal organizations and individual lawbreakers . 
Such  driven  members  sometimes  take  their  need  for 
revenge too far, prompting the clan to turn them over to 
the proper authorities .
  Seven Ravens Clan members make good patrons and 
allies . They work well as information brokers who can 
provide the PCs knowledge of the city’s underworld in 
exchange for a favor . As a twist, you can use a city guard 
officer to send the PCs on various missions to stop different 
criminal organizations, revealing only later (or not at all) 
that the PCs’ contact is actually a Raven .
 Adaptation: Obviously, the Seven Ravens Clan is best 
suited to city-based campaigns, especially those that focus 
on intrigue and the workings of the criminal underworld . 
The clan can also work as a rebel organization working 
surreptitiously to overthrow a usurper or despot . If you 
prefer, you can easily alter the clan’s overall outlook to 
make it into a traditional thieves’ guild, either as one the 
PCs support or as one they oppose .
 Sample  Encounter: Several avenues exist for involv-
ing the PCs with the Seven Ravens Clan . If a character’s 
background  includes  entanglements  with  a  criminal 
organization, she might begin play as a member of the clan . 
Alternatively, the clan might send a representative to meet 
her shortly after the start of the campaign . On the other 
hand, a PC who belongs to a thieves’ guild might become 
the target of a Seven Ravens Clan raid—particularly if she 
makes a name for herself in the city . Or the party might 
stumble onto the clan by breaking up yet another robbery 
of Taan’s Timeless Trinkets, thereby discovering the main 
entrance to the Rookery .
 EL 11: Despite his importance to the clan, Katsuo insists 
on personally leading raids into enemy strongholds . When 
not on a mission, he enjoys leisurely strolls through the 
city’s better neighborhoods and carriage rides to the guard 
barracks . He remains ever restless and hates remaining 
cooped up within the Rookery’s confining walls . Because 
of concern expressed by those around him, Katsuo cannot 
leave the Rookery without his ever watchful bodyguard, 
Aska Cannet (female human rogue 4/warrior 6) . 
  If the PCs are members of the clan, they might encounter 
Katsuo alone within the Rookery . Otherwise they might 
run into him (and Aska) on a walk or while traveling to 
the guard barracks (if other guards are with him, the EL 
of the encounter might increase) .
Katsuo Golddragon CR 11
Male human rogue 7/scout* 4
 *Scout class from Complete Adventurer
NG Medium humanoid
Init +4; Senses Listen +11, Spot +13
Languages	Common, Elven, Sylvan
AC 19, touch 13, flat-footed 19; uncanny dodge
 (+3 Dex, +4 armor, +2 natural)
hp 45 (11 HD)
Fort +4, Ref +12, Will +4
Resist evasion 
Speed 40 ft. (8 squares)
Melee	mwk knife crossbow bayonet +6/+1 (1d6–1)
Ranged +2 light crossbow +13 (1d8+2/19–20) 
Base	Atk	+8; Grp	+7
Atk	Options Combat Reflexes, Concussion Attack, Point 
Blank Shot, Precise Shot, skill tricks, skirmish (+3d6, +3 
AC), sneak attack +4d6
Combat	Gear 2 potions of cure moderate wounds 
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 12, Cha 13
SQ battle fortitude, trackless step, trap sense +2, trapfinding
Feats Combat Reflexes, Concussion Attack*, Improved Skir-
mish*, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot
B
, Swift Ambusher*
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Balance +5, Bluff +9, Climb +12, Diplomacy +18, Dis-
guise +1 (+3 acting), Escape Artist +16, Gather Informa-
tion +13, Hide +11, Intimidate +3, Jump +14, Knowledge 
(local) +11, Listen +11, Sense Motive +9, Spot +13, Swim 
+4, Tumble +18, Use Rope +3 (+5 involving bindings) 
Skill	Tricks* Acrobatic Backstab, Leaping Climber, Quick 
Escape, Quick Swimmer
 *Described in Chapter 3
Possessions	combat gear plus +2 leather armor, +2 light 
crossbow with masterwork knife crossbow bayonet* and 
60 bolts, 10 silvered bolts, and 10 cold iron bolts, amulet 
of natural armor +2
 *New item described in Chapter 5
Battle	Fortitude	(Ex)	Bonus on initiative checks and Fortitude 
saves while wearing light or no armor and carrying a light 
load. Included above. Complete Adventurer 12.

12
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
legendarY sITes
Legendary sites, similar to magical locations (a concept 
introduced in Dungeon  Master’s  Guide  II), are areas with 
special properties or effects from which a character might 
gain a significant benefit .
  Magical locations are areas that have been crafted by 
mighty magic or imbued with ancient power . They are 
hard to find and harder to use, and confer their powers 
but rarely . Legendary sites, in contrast, are places where 
great  works  have  been  wrought  and  where  seemingly 
impossible deeds have occurred . These locations have a 
lesser kind of power . A site such as a sandy beach where 
an explorer stepped for the first time, or a plaza where 
a long-fallen marvel once towered, pulses with its own 
renown, if not with true magic . The stories that inspire 
these places and make them famous lend them reputations 
that can be shared by those who brush with such a site’s 
notoriety . Characters who visit these sites of historical 
import, incredible acts, mystery, and great danger come 
away changed, not just in the eyes of the public but in their 
own hearts as well .
  Such  legendary  sites  need  not  be  unique .  Their 
inspirational  effects  might  develop  wherever  a  spot 
becomes imbued with a momentous event or spectacular 
achievement .
legendarY sITe des  CrIPTIons
The legendary sites described below are presented in the 
following format .
name of legendary site
The entry begins with a description of the location .
 Lore:  This  portion  of  the  description  provides  any 
information  available  to  characters  about  the  location, 
along with the relevant Knowledge check DCs necessary 
to acquire it . Bardic knowledge checks can be substituted 
for any of these checks at the same DCs .
 Description: This entry offers a physical description 
of a typical example of such a location and includes more 
details  about  the  place  (including  sounds,  smells,  and 
tactile sensations) and details of how its effect or special 
ability looks once activated .
 Prerequisite:  Any  prerequisite  needed  to  gain  the 
legendary site’s special ability is detailed here . In addition 
to meeting this prerequisite, a character must visit the 
location physically to have any chance of acquiring the 
special ability it confers .
 Location  Activation: These paragraphs describe the 
rules for acquiring and using the special ability that the 
location bestows . Any command words or activities needed 
to activate the location’s power are also noted here .
 Recharge: Some legendary sites confer their benefits 
only at intervals; this section details the time that must 
pass before the site’s power can be used again . Legendary 
sites such as those described here often confer their 
benefits repeatedly, though certain conditions might apply 
as described in this entry .
 Special Ability: This entry describes the special ability 
conferred and gives the rules for using it . Unless otherwise 
specified, no creature can gain the benefit of a legendary 
site’s conferred power more than once .
 Duration: This section gives the ability’s duration or 
number of uses .
 Aura: This line describes the type of magical aura, if any, 
that surrounds the location . (Legendary sites, including 
those described here, typically have no magical auras .)
 Variation: Since legendary sites can arise in multiple 
places, this entry (if present) suggests similar situations 
or areas for placing the location .
 Ability Value: This entry provides the gp value of the 
conferred ability . Although these abilities can never be 
bought or sold, they can be substituted for treasure of like 
value and count toward the benefiting character’s overall 
wealth .
bussengeIsT haunT
Tragedy follows calamity, disaster follows catastrophe, and 
a lifetime of death leads to an afterlife of mourning . Or, 
at least, such is the way of the bussengeist haunt . Spawn-
ing wherever some foul action or gross inaction leads to 
a  catastrophe  of  life-shattering  proportions,  these  dim 
towers,  fallen  gatehouses,  broken  dams,  and  similarly 
gloomy locales are infused with an almost palpable regret, a 
weight that saps all levity and dampens the soul . Yet despite 
such a place’s ill nature, those bearing a lesser burden of 
misfortune might cast their weight away in such a place, 
like tears into a lake .
  Often neglected and abandoned to its own unnatural 
gloom, a bussengeist haunt might appear anywhere that has 
fallen under the shadow of tragedy . The specific locale 
described below is just one example .
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (history) 
or Knowledge (religion) can research a bussengeist haunt 
to learn more about it . When a character succeeds on a 
skill check, the following lore is revealed, including the 
information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Decades  ago  a  great  misfortune  occurred  at 
Nereid Dam, causing the dam to break and wipe out a 
nearby town .
 DC 15: Nereid  Dam  now  lies  in  ruins,  a  crumbling 
watchtower on one shore being the only evidence that it 
ever stood . This tower is rumored to be haunted .
 DC 20:  A  cruel  black  dragon  shattered  Nereid  Dam . 
Supposedly a guard saw the monster as it approached, but 
rather then alerting the defending garrison, he attempted 
to flee . He died with the rest .
 DC 25:  Some  places  resound  with  the  gravity  of  the 
actions that occurred there . A bussengeist haunt is such a 
place, infused with the results of a tragic action or inaction . 
Bussengeist haunts often attract mournful ghosts and other 
regretful or tortured undead .

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
 Description: On the moldy shores of the Wreckwater 
hunch the last, dilapidated remains of Nereid Dam . Even 
flights  of  bats  and  the  teeming  reptiles  of  the  murky 
water refuse to linger among the crumbling gray stones 
of the tower that yet stands . Overgrown and abandoned, 
its wooden floors long rotted and fallen, the two-story 
tower is a husk thick with dust and ages-old debris . Yet 
when the wind blows across the river and through the 
sagging ruin, the tower creaks and groans with its own 
regretful song . And sometimes, some say, a voice moans 
over these sounds of decrepitude—a hollow, tortured sigh 
ever calling, “Why?”
  While within the boundaries of a bussengeist haunt, no 
character can use a luck reroll from a luck feat (page 72) 
or an action point (from the eberron Campaign Setting) .
 Prerequisite: A character must be suffering from the 
effect of a curse or ill luck to make use of a bussengeist 
haunt.
 Location Activation: A character must spend at least 
10 minutes describing her problems, curses, or afflictions 
while  within  the  boundaries  of  a bussengeist  haunt .  At 
the end of this declaration, she gains the benefit of the 
location . The character must be able to confess her own 
problems aloud; thus, a silenced, petrified, or otherwise 
muted character cannot receive its ability .
  This  spiritual  unburdening  attracts  the  attention  of 
1d4 spirits chained to the area (plus one additional spirit 
for  each  creature  after  the  first  seeking  the  location’s 
benefit) . These spirits manifest in a variety of forms, most 
commonly  as  allips,  ghosts,  or  spectres,  depending  on 
the level of the characters who enter . The apparitions are 
the remnants of those whose acts doomed so many and 
created the bussengeist haunt . They are not malicious but 
seek forgiveness for their actions from any who will listen . 
Their terrible forms can make conversation difficult, with 
confrontation all too common . Characters who do manage 
to communicate with these spirits and hearken to their 
tales can convince the undead to leave them in peace .
 Recharge: Any character who enters and activates a 
bussengeist haunt can acquire its special ability, and multiple 
characters can do so at the same time . A character can 
return to remove a later curse . Each time requires dealing 
with the resident spirits, however .
 Special  Ability  (Su): A character who confesses her 
worries and problems to a bussengeist haunt casts them away, 
her magical afflictions subsumed into the existing ill will 
of the location . Treat this effect as if break enchantment had 
been cast on the character .
  All who benefit from a bussengeist haunt, though, become 
infused with a portion of the negative emotion and foul 
stigma  associated  with  this  location .  This  dark  energy 
applies a –1 penalty on attack rolls, saves, and checks and 
prevents the character from using any luck rerolls or action 
points for the next 7 days .
 Duration: The break enchantment effect is instantaneous, 
while the dark energy lingers for 7 days .
 Variation: A bussengeist haunt might appear in any of a 
number of forms . Any place that holds the psychic residue 
of a great tragedy might be a focal point for ill emotions, 
such  as  the  boarded-over  office  of  a  neglectful  regent, 
a wizard’s workplace housing a still-open portal to the 
Elemental Plane of Fire, or a charred druidic circle .
 Ability Value: 1,000 gp .
ChaMPIon’s CroWn
Blood-soaked and forever reverberating with the screams 
of countless wild crowds, the champion’s crown is the goal 
of every gladiator and sporting competitor, the summit 
of athletic accomplishment . A steep ziggurat festooned 
with laurels and the weapons of past heroes, the champion’s 
crown  dominates  one  end  of  the  imperial  coliseum,  a 
distant but everpresent goal . The adulation of a crazed 
crowd  and  the  invigorating  soul  of  triumph  lend  this 
site its power . 
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can 
research the champion’s crown to learn more about it . When 
a character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: The champion’s crown is the podium of victors at 
the coliseum .
 DC 15: The champion’s crown has numerous tiers used in 
varying sporting events, but the pinnacle is reserved for 
those who have accomplished the greatest feats and who 
have gained the adoration of the crowd .
 DC 20: The weapons of past victors adorn the champion’s 
crown. It is said that these weapons and the spirits of past 
champions guard the ziggurat against the unworthy and 
cheaters who attempt to ascend .
 DC 25: The champion’s crown is far older than the coli-
seum . It was once used as an altar by some nameless cult 
for ceremonial battles and ritual bloodlettings .
 Description: Towering over 60 feet tall, the champion’s 
crown is a black stone ziggurat pierced with numerous 
gigantic  nails  of  rusted  iron .  Covering  its  surface  are 
images of gory battle, and in places, grisly sacrifice . Much 
of this dark imagery is covered over with laurel garlands, 
lengths of blue cloth, and the weapons of past champions, 
some ages old . At 10-foot intervals, one on each side of the 
structure, are platforms made to honor lesser champions 
and  lower-ranking  athletes .  These  rostrums  each  cor-
respond to specific rankings, well known by visitors .
 Prerequisite: Only a creature that has fairly achieved 
some great victory in the coliseum, sparked the adulation 
of a full crowd, and climbs to its highest platform can gain 
the benefit of the champion’s crown . An official, priest, or 
master of ceremonies presiding over the coliseum deter-
mines who is worthy of such prestige .
  Rarely is someone allowed to scale the champion’s crown 
after only one appearance . This place of honor is reserved 
for one who has participated in a championship and bested 
all comers or performed a feat of prowess never before 
witnessed on the coliseum floor .

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
 Location  Activation: A character who arrives at the 
pinnacle of the champion’s crown and spends 1 minute soak-
ing in the adoration of the crowd gains the benefit of this 
location . It is possible, though rare, for several characters 
to be so honored at the same time .
  Ascending to the victor’s platform of the champion’s crown 
requires a successful DC 12 Climb check . The top of the 
ziggurat has room for four Medium creatures .
 Recharge: Any champion who has performed admirably 
in the coliseum might gain the benefits of the champion’s 
crown. The true love of the people is rare, however, and 
usually no more than three individuals in a city enjoy 
the special ability conferred by the location . Successful 
gladiatorial groups or sporting teams sometimes exceed 
this limit .
  An individual can regain the benefits of this location 
after 1 year if he once again accomplishes a crowd-pleasing 
and noteworthy feat in the coliseum .
 Special  Ability  (Ex): A character who has rightfully 
ascended the champion’s crown becomes a hero of the com-
munity that holds the coliseum . He gains a +2 bonus on 
Diplomacy, Gather Information, and Intimidate checks 
made to influence or gain information from any individual 
who resides in that city .
  In addition, all residents of the community have a default 
initial attitude of friendly toward the character if they 
recognize him .
 Duration: The favor of the public is fickle, and thus the 
benefits of this location fade after 1 year .
 Ability Value: 1,000 gp .
CourT of ThIeves
Below labyrinthine sewers, deep basement vaults, and 
the lairs of hidden creatures that feast on society’s filth 
lies the lost throne of the underworld, the famed yet for-
gotten court of thieves. Generations of bandit lords, robber 
kings, master assassins, and at times fouler tyrants held 
court in this sprawling den of excesses hidden beneath 
the very noses of those who would root it out . Those days 
are long past .
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (history) or 
Knowledge (local) can research the court of thieves to learn 
more about it . When a character succeeds on a skill check, 
the following lore is revealed, including the information 
from lower DCs .
 DC 10: The court of thieves was a hidden place where any-
thing could be bought and any pleasure could be had .
 DC 15: All thieves’ guilds and criminal activities were 
once ruled over by the elusive court of thieves .
 DC 20: Treasures from a hundred lands were piled at the 
feet of the king of thieves as payment for the privilege of 
conducting crimes within his city .
 DC 25: The vices of greedy brigands and honorless rogues 
eventually splintered the king’s power and left the court of 
thieves abandoned .
 Description: The court of thieves is a subterranean palace, 
a complex of chambers built in secret far beneath city 
streets . One hall might be as vast and grand as the royal 
opera house—and indeed might have been used for a simi-
lar purpose—while the next could be nothing more than a 
crumbling chamber of exposed rock and sewer pipes . The 
The champion’s crown
Illus. by E. Deschamps

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
most splendid and remarkable room in the court of thieves 
is the hall housing the Throne of Thieves . This giant-sized 
throne of the king of thieves is ornately and fantastically 
sculpted, and within its nooks and crevices generations 
of rogues kept their precious trinkets, lucky charms, and 
symbols of Olidammara . Although the court was largely 
stripped by the criminals who abandoned it, these trifles 
were left behind out of respect for the dethroned king of 
thieves .
  The entrance to the court of thieves has long been lost . 
Hidden deep within an ancient sewer, crumbled ware-
house, tavern basement, or in the shadow of some bastion 
of law, the door is masterfully disguised . Those who do 
manage to find it must then best a gantlet of tricks and 
traps designed to keep out uninvited guests, not to mention 
overcoming whatever creatures might now call the court 
of thieves home .
 Prerequisite: A character must navigate the court  of 
thieves all the way to the Throne of Thieves to gain the 
location’s benefit .
 Location Activation: A character merely has to take a 
trinket from the Throne of Thieves to gain this location’s 
special ability . Although ancient, these baubles are not 
valuable, being lucky copper coins minted by long fallen 
empires, archaic or no-longer-used holy symbols, rusted 
lockpicks  scored  with  an  owner’s  initials,  and  similar 
such items .
 Recharge: As long as the location of the court of thieves 
remains  a  secret,  anyone  can  gain  its  benefits .  Should 
its location become widespread knowledge, though, the 
exceptional nature of having visited the place fades, and 
it no longer confers any benefit .
 Special Ability (Ex): Any character who successfully 
navigates the dangers of the court of thieves is blessed with 
the great luck of Olidammara . He gains a bonus luck feat 
(page 72) of his choice, though he must still meet the 
normal prerequisite for that feat .
  Furthermore, any character who bears an item taken 
from the Throne of Thieves is considered to have touched 
rogue royalty . The character doubles his Charisma bonus (if 
any) for the purpose of determining his Leadership score 
when trying to attract a cohort or followers with levels 
of bard or rogue . In addition, the character can also have 
double the normal number of contacts within the criminal 
underworld (DMG2 153)    .
 Duration: The luck feat gained by the character is a 
permanent benefit . The other benefits last as long as the 
character possesses the trinket taken from the Throne of 
Thieves .
 Ability Value: 6,000 gp .
The frog god’s fane
Half sunken and overgrown by ages of decay, the ancient 
temple of a strange, little-known deity molders deep in 
the jungle marshes . Its location has been long forgotten, 
and now the only attendants of the frog  god’s  fane croak 
lazily amid moldy relics and fallen statues forming islands 
of gold .

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (history), 
Knowledge (nature), or Knowledge (religion) can research 
the frog god’s fane to learn more about it . When a character 
succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is revealed, 
including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 15: Countless  civilizations  have  risen  and  fallen 
deep within the jungle . Their ruins still lie hidden from 
civilized eyes .
 DC 20: A cult that worshiped Wastri, a deity shaped like 
a frog, once held great influence from a stone temple in an 
untamed swamp . Frogs of incredible size are sometimes 
spotted near mysterious ruins deep within the flooded 
jungle .
 DC 25: Wastri directs his followers to further the needs 
of humans and amphibians . His worshipers once erected 
rich temples to honor their deity in the murky places his 
swamp-born wards might attend . 
 Description: Crumbling and overrun by denizens of 
the  swamp—especially  bloated  and  oversized  amphib-
ians—the frog god’s fane is now more a monument to rot 
than to any deity . Whole floors have been flooded, and the 
riches that once lined the walls and served as sacrifices 
have been lost to ages of muck and eroding waters . Yet 
within  its  deepest  sanctuaries,  through  passages  filled 
by brackish waters, lie hidden chambers in air pockets . 
Within  these  depths  remain  treasures  untouched  by 
swamp  water,  but  even  more  valuable  are  the  strange 
secrets carved in stone: sculptures once viewed only by the 
highest of priests, which detail worship by both human 
and amphibian .
 Prerequisite: A character must discover the ruined frog 
god’s fane and reach the secret chambers within its depths 
to gain the benefit of this location .
 Location Activation: A character must spend at least 
10 minutes in meditation on the scriptural secrets hidden 
deep within the frog  god’s  fane, and make a DC 15 Intel-
ligence check at the end of that time . If she succeeds on 
this check, she gains the benefit of this location . Other-
wise, she has failed to accept some vital truth among the 
markings .
 Recharge: Any number of characters who plumb the 
treacherous depths of the frog god’s fane can gain the benefit 
of this location . A character who fails the required Intel-
ligence check cannot try again until her Intelligence score 
permanently increases .
 Special  Ability  (Ex): Upon succeeding on the Intel-
ligence check to understand the frog god’s secrets, the 
character makes a fundamental connection, gaining an 
insight into truths she never realized were linked . She 
gains Skill Focus in her choice of Knowledge (history), 
(nature), or (religion) as a bonus feat . Furthermore, even 
if the character has no ranks in the chosen Knowledge 
skill, she can make checks with that skill as if she were 
trained .
 Duration: A character who gains the insight of the 
frog  god’s  fane  learns  its  secrets  and  gains  its  benefits 
permanently .
 Variation: Any seat of great and unfathomable informa-
tion might grant an effect like that of the frog god’s fane . For 
example, a metal tower crashed from the stars might grant 
those who come to understand it bonuses on Knowledge 
(architecture and engineering) and Knowledge (the planes) 
checks, while the ancestral library of the imperial family 
might provide insights into Knowledge (geography) and 
Knowledge (nobility and royalty) . Such information is too 
esoteric to share, requiring one to experience it person-
ally to gain its benefits, but a character might learn some 
important piece of information that could lead to further 
adventures .
 Ability Value: 2,000 gp .
heWard’s hall
An obscure patron of bards and other music makers, the 
mortal Heward studied the ancient songs of the elves, 
and legends say, eventually brought music to humanity . 
He created instruments that are commonplace today and 
composed some of the oldest songs and airs known to the 
race, as well as crafting a unique pipe organ known for its 
mystical properties . His furthering of music led bards to 
honor Heward’s name, eventually giving rise to a number 
of cathedrals, concert halls, and playhouses dedicated to 
the first bard, each taking the name “Heward’s hall .” Some 
of these sites are incredibly inspirational to songsmiths 
and musicians of all walks, instilling within them the 
ability to push their own talents to extreme heights . The 
specific locale described below is just one example of such 
a legendary performance venue .
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (religion) 
can research a Heward’s hall to learn more about it . When 
a character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore 
is revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 15: Heward is the patron of bards and human musi-
cians . This result reveals the commonly known stories 
bout him .
 DC 20: Numerous concert halls and theaters are known 
as Heward’s halls, in honor of the first bard . Some such 
places are very inspirational to artists .
 DC 25: Owners, managers, or religious groups control-
ling a legendary Heward’s hall often restrict access to only 
the most accomplished or promising artists .
 Description:  Behind  the  stage  of  the  Saltmarsh 
Playhouse’s main auditorium is an organist’s nook, a famed 
Heward’s hall . The high-ceilinged room allows an accompa-
nist to play the impressive, two-story pipe organ without 
its size and grandeur detracting from performances on 
stage . The walls of the room and many of the towering 
brass pipes of the organ are engraved with well-known 
songs that are said to have been composed by Heward 
or that are dedicated to the first bard . Directly over the 

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
dual keyboards of the organ sits a stone bust of Heward 
himself, a foppish-looking rake with a jaunty smile and 
tousled hair . Despite all efforts, the Saltmarsh Heward’s 
hall is constantly plagued by small rodents, and the organ 
itself requires frequent retuning .
  Aydi Zarastian, guildmaster of the playhouse, created 
this Heward’s hall as a matter of tradition, holding that all 
the finest theaters and performance halls should host such 
a shrine . As a connoisseur of the arts, she grants access only 
to those with formal training and true musical talent .
 Prerequisite: To gain the special ability conferred by 
a Heward’s hall, a character must possess at least 10 ranks 
in a Perform skill and must succeed on a DC 30 Perform 
check made as part of a public performance in the hall . The 
performer can’t take 10 on this check . The owner of the 
Heward’s hall, however, might place additional conditions 
or limits on access .
  Though most performers prefer to use the Saltmarsh 
hall’s great pipe organ (requiring Perform [keyboard instru-
ments]), other types of performances are permitted . 
 Location Activation: At the conclusion of a successful 
performance in a Heward’s hall, the location immediately 
confers its benefit on the performer .
 Recharge: Only one character per night can gain the 
benefit of a Heward’s hall.
 Special  Ability  (Ex):  A  character  who  successfully 
completes a performance in a Heward’s  hall gains Skill 
Focus (Perform) as a bonus feat, using the same Perform 
subcategory as that of the performance . If the performer 
already has Skill Focus (Perform) in that subcategory, he 
can instead select any bardic music feat for which he meets 
the prerequisite .
  The performer also gains a +2 competence bonus on 
Craft checks to create new artistic compositions related 
to Perform skills . This bonus applies to all forms of per-
formance, from acting to instrumental play .
 Variation: This version of a Heward’s hall enhances the 
Perform skill, but the idea of an inspirational site yield-
ing greater works can easily be adapted to any number of 
other skills . For example, the nonmagical forge in which 
a famous weapon or legendary artifact was created might 
inspire future generations to create great works in metal 
over its fires, granting Skill Focus (Craft) or even an item 
creation feat .
 Duration: The bonus feat granted by a Heward’s hall is 
permanent . The competence bonus on Craft checks fades 
after 1 year .
 Ability Value: 5,000 gp .
The hIghesT sPIre
Jutting past castle towers and temple minarets, the high-
est spire reaches from the mortal world to stab at the very 
heavens . The pinnacle of what is unquestionably the tallest 
building in the city, it draws travelers from the world over 
to stand in its incredible shadow . Every year as part of an 
annual  festival,  a  handful  of  daredevils  and  adventure 
seekers gaze up at the famed structure’s summit not out 
of awe, but determined to reach the top .
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can 
research the highest spire to learn more about it . When a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: The highest spire is aptly named, being the tallest 
building in the city and possibly in the civilized world .
 DC 15: Every year, during a citywide festival, a dozen or 
so revelers attempt to scale the highest spire to win the title 
“Spire Hawk .” 
 DC 20: Every year several people are bruised and battered 
climbing the spire, and occasionally the attempt ends in 
a climber’s death .
 DC 25: No guard can patrol the spire’s highest reaches . 
Who knows what might lurk or roost in its cloud-cloaked 
recesses?
 Description: Hewn from a distant mountain peak’s 
night-blue marble and studded with starlike pearls, the 
highest spire itself is a 50-foot steeple sculpted as an exult-
ing, spear-wielding archon . The spire is mounted atop the 
tallest building in the city, whose summit is a full 1,333 feet 
from the ground . Constructed by magic, and supposedly 
held aloft by the same forces, this wonder of the world 
compels visitors to attempt to scale it year after year .
  The loftiest reaches of the highest spire are treacher-
ous, and not simply due to the height . The tower’s many 
projections and the intricate wings and folds of the 
spire’s angelic form create sizable niches . Rumors have 
long held that dire bats, arrowhawks, even a dragon or 
even a territorial and ill-tempered couatl might live at 
the peak of this artificial mountain . (The DM should 
assign one or more hostile creatures to interfere with 
progress to the top, based on the average level of the 
ascending characters .)
 Prerequisite: A  character  must  climb  from  the 
building’s base to the peak of the highest spire on a specific 
holiday to gain the location’s benefit . 
 Location  Activation:  The  building  the highest  spire 
perches atop requires successful DC 25 Climb checks to 
scale, while climbing the convoluted spire itself requires 
only DC 15 checks . The first character to complete the 
ascent immediately benefits from the location’s conferred 
power . 
  Climbers are not permitted to use any spell, wondrous 
item, or other magical effect to assist in the climb (includ-
ing Strength-boosting effects) or to reach the pinnacle by 
other means . Scarring the building, such as by hammer-
ing pitons into its surfaces, is also forbidden, although 
nondamaging  climbing  implements  and  mechanical 
inventions are acceptable .
  Festival mages check all participants and closely monitor 
their ascents . These mages commonly prepare protective 
spells such as feather  fall to aid imperiled climbers, but 

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
athletes are encouraged to make their own precaution-
ary arrangements . The ban against magic is the only rule 
once climbing begins . Interfering with other climbers is 
frowned upon, but not prohibited .
 Recharge: After a character has become the year’s Spire 
Hawk, no one can benefit from the highest spire’s special 
ability for 1 year . The next year, a new climber earns the 
title (this could be the previous year’s champion) .
  No character can gain more than one bonus feat from 
the highest spire, though a second victory still bestows the 
other benefits noted below .
 Special  Ability  (Ex):  The  experience  of scaling the 
highest spire grants a character insight into her own athletic 
talents that she never realized before . She gains her choice 
of Skill Focus (Climb) or Agile Athlete (see the sidebar) 
as a bonus feat .
  Additionally, that character earns the title “Spire Hawk” 
and receives a finely crafted wooden medallion carved 
with the image of the archon at the tower’s peak . For the 
next year, that character holds the champion’s title and 
wears this medallion, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus on 
Diplomacy checks when dealing with natives of the city 
that is home to the highest spire. In addition, the character 
receives a 10% discount on all goods and services purchased 
in that city (up to a maximum discount of 1,000 gp on 
items or services costing 10,000 gp or more) .
 Duration: The bonus feat conferred by this location is 
permanent . The other benefits remain until the next city 
festival, a year later . At that time, the character must be the 
first to climb the highest spire again, or lose these benefits 
to the new champion .
 Variation: The highest spire might be any location that 
involves an annual feat of skill and endurance . Chang-
ing this location to suit your campaign is as simple as 
making the event a lengthy marathon, night-long ball, 
song competition, scavenger hunt, or any other trial that 
tests the competitors’ ability and stamina. The frequency 
of the event might also change, shortening to several 
times a year or becoming a rare festival that occurs only 
once a decade . The difficulty might also change, even 
requiring Constitution checks (perhaps of increasing 
pqs
agIle aThleTe
You rely on your agility to perform athletics feats, rather than 
brute strength.
 Prerequisite:	Climb 1 rank, Jump 1 rank.
 Benefit:	When making a Climb or Jump check, you use your 
Dexterity modifier for the check.
 Normal:	Without this feat, you use your Strength modifier 
for Climb and Jump checks.
    This feat first appeared in Races of the Wild.
pqs
The highest spire
Illus. by H. Lyon

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
difficulty) and imposing ever greater restrictions to 
continue competing .
 Ability Value: 3,000 gp .
Iron WYrM vaulT
The lifeblood of a nation—tax gold, imperial heirlooms, 
the spoils of forgotten wars—all flows here to the ultimate 
in security, the iron wyrm vault. This treasure trove of a 
centuries-old dynasty is every thief’s dream, and count-
less such dreamers have lost their lives reaching for their 
fantasy .
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (nobility 
and royalty) can research the iron wyrm vault to learn more 
about it . When a character succeeds on a skill check, the 
following lore is revealed, including the information from 
lower DCs .
 DC 10: The rulers of the nation keep their most precious 
treasures in an ancient trove called the iron wyrm vault.
 DC 15: Countless  traps,  magical  wards,  and  undying 
guardians  protect  the iron  wyrm  vault, their  numbers 
expanding with the innovations of each new generation .
 DC 20: Members of the royal family know how to cir-
cumvent the defenses of the iron wyrm vault.
   DC 25: The iron wyrm vault is named for its most obvi-
ous decoration, which is also rumored to be its strongest 
guardian.
 Description: While the entire compound that houses 
the iron wyrm vault is known by that name, the actual vault 
is a hall of interconnected chambers that include lavishly 
appointed  salons,  display  rooms  of  glittering  artifacts, 
and repositories brimming with loose coins . Above the 
entire complex hangs a sculpture of exquisite quality, an 
amazingly lifelike dragon the size of a great wyrm shaped 
from pure adamantine .
  Within the iron wyrm vault, dazzling treasures collect 
dust    . The smells of old air and mild decay mingle with 
the static charge of magical protections so numerous and 
powerful as to be palpable . Those who enter feel as though 
they’re being watched . Some of the relics stored here are 
kept hidden away out of fear, and other ancient treasures 
even have minds and agendas all their own .
  The  DM  should  populate  the  iron  wyrm  vault  with 
magic traps and guardians appropriate for the levels of the 
characters infiltrating it . (Avoid protections that would 
damage the valuables, such as a fireball trap in a room filled 
with priceless paintings .) Against epic-level characters, the 
great sculpture might be an ironwyrm golem of immense 
size (Draconomicon 165)    .
 Prerequisite: A character must successfully navigate the 
protections of the iron wyrm vault to claim its benefit .
 Location  Activation: Simply breaking into the iron 
wyrm vault without the knowledge or consent of the place’s 
royal  owners  isn’t  quite  enough  to  make  the  burglar  a 
legend . Only claiming an item from the iron wyrm vault 
as proof of its infiltration activates the location’s benefit .
  At the DM’s option, those captured after reaching the 
vault might gain the location’s benefit even if they have 
nothing to show for their visit, as tales of their daring 
act—and perhaps even subsequent trial—spread through 
word of mouth .
 Recharge:  Any  character  who  enters  the iron  wyrm 
vault, successfully passes its countless guardians and trials, 
and returns with proof of his accomplishment gains the 
location’s benefit .
 Special  Ability  (Ex): Breaching the iron  wyrm  vault 
grants  the  thief  great  insights  into  his  own  powers  of 
stealth and thievery . The character gains one of the follow-
ing as a bonus feat: Nimble Fingers, Skill Focus (Disable 
Device,  Hide,  Move  Silently,  Open  Lock,  or  Search), 
Stealthy, or Tactile Trapsmith (see the sidebar) .
  Furthermore, the successful burglar gains a +2 bonus on 
Diplomacy and Gather Information checks made to influ-
ence or gain information from any thief, freedom fighter, 
or other opponent of the nation that controls the iron wyrm 
vault (as long as the character’s escapade is known to them) . 
However, he takes a –2 penalty on the same checks made 
in conjunction with guards, members of the noble class, 
and other “respectable” sorts within that nation .
  These benefits are in addition to any treasure the char-
acter might have stolen from the iron wyrm vault.
 Duration: Having  infiltrated  one  of  the  most  heav-
ily guarded treasure troves in the land makes a thief a 
legend for life, so the effects of the iron  wyrm  vault are 
permanent .
 Variation: The iron  wyrm  vault might  be  any  heav-
ily  guarded  trove  of  any  kind  of  treasure,  perhaps  the 
storehouse  of  an  influential  religion,  crime  syndicate, 
or  powerful  monster .  Likewise,  what  is  stored  within 
also  might  be  anything  of  value,  such  as  a  library  of 
arcane tomes, an arsenal of powerful weapons, or even 
a prison filled with dissidents . The DM should alter the 
groups affected by the location’s benefit to better fit any 
modifications .
  Additionally, the skill check modifiers granted by this 
location might vary depending on what a character takes 
from the vault . One who steals the crown of the nation’s 
founder, for example, might receive a +5 bonus (and –5 
penalty) instead of the normal +2/–2 .
 Ability Value: 3,000 gp .
pqs
Ta CTIle TraPsMITh
You can rely on your rapid reflexes and nimble fingers instead 
of your intellect when searching a room or when disabling a 
trap.
 Benefit:	You  add  your  Dexterity  bonus  (rather  than  your 
Intelligence bonus) on all Search and Disable Device checks.
    In addition, you receive no penalty on these checks for dark-
ness or blindness.
    This feat first appeared in Complete Adventurer.
pqs

10
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
olIdaMMara’s shell
One legend associated with the bard of the gods, Olidam-
mara, tells how the divine trickster was once cornered 
by an army of ogres . Rather than fight the savages, the 
keen-witted deity surrounded himself with a spherical 
carapace that resembled the shell of an armadillo . Once 
he was thus covered, the god teleported away from inside 
the shell, leaving the brutes to beat on the empty container 
for a year and a day .
  After the ogres finally dispersed, a greedy wizard discov-
ered the shell and sought to use the divine creation for his 
own purposes . Much to the mage’s 
chagrin, however, the shell disap-
peared from his possession . Now 
Olidammara’s shell appears and 
disappears at the fickle god’s 
whim, and might show up in 
unlikely places .
 Lore:  Characters  with 
ranks  in  Knowledge 
(religion)  can  research 
Olidammara’s shell to learn 
more  about  it .  When  a 
character  succeeds  on  a 
skill check, the following 
lore  is  revealed,  includ-
ing the information from 
lower DCs .
 DC 15: A  successful 
check reveals the story 
of  Olidammara  using 
his  shell  to  escape  the 
army of ogres .
 DC 20: Olidammara’s shell 
teleports  from  place  to 
place, seemingly with the 
same  whimsical  nature 
as  Olidammara  himself . 
Those who find the shell and 
touch it gain good luck .
 DC 25: Olidammara’s shell does 
not allow itself to be tracked or 
exploited .  Those  who  find  it  should 
thank their own luck and benefit from the 
shell while they can, for it vanishes as quickly 
as it appears .
 Description:  Approximately  4  feet  in  diameter, 
Olidammara’s shell is an unbreakable sphere with a dull 
metallic luster . In its jumps from place to place, the shell 
takes on slightly smaller or larger sizes to better suit its 
surroundings, and even takes on different colors, at the 
deity’s whim . Wherever it appears, the shell floats of 
its own accord as it spins slowly, even in places where 
such magical levitation would normally be impossible . 
Furthermore,  an antimagic  field  apparently  surrounds 
the shell, since most magic seems unable to work in 
its vicinity .
  Currently Olidammara’s shell hovers about 40 feet off the 
ground, just above a massive pedestal perched atop the 
gigantic gate of Castle Granite Throne, the fortress home 
of a clan of stone giants . Although the giants largely ignore 
the shell, rumors have started circulating in nearby towns 
of the divine object’s appearance . Adventure-seekers and 
daredevils have sought to magically fly or levitate up to the 
shell, only to fall upon entering its antimagic field . Since 
none have dared enter the castle and the giants thwart all 
attempts to reach it, the shell remains a goal as obvious 
and tempting as it is frustratingly elusive .
 Prerequisite: A character must have at least 
one luck feat (page 72) to gain the benefit 
conferred by Olidammara’s shell .
 Location  Activation:  A  character 
who touches and remains in contact 
with Olidammara’s  shell  for  1  full 
round gains this location’s special 
ability .
 Recharge:  Any  number 
of  characters  can  potentially 
make use of Olidammara’s shell . 
However, every time a charac-
ter  tries  to  touch  the  shell, 
roll 1d6 . On a result of 1, 
the  shell  teleports  away 
before  being  touched, 
preventing the character 
from gaining any benefit . 
Otherwise,  the  location 
confers its special ability .
 Special   Ability   (Su): 
Upon  touching Olidam-
mara’s  shell,  a  character 
gains a bit of the luck of the 
trickster  deity .  She  gains 
five extra luck rerolls, each 
of which can be used only 
once    .
 Duration: The benefits 
of Olidammara’s  shell  are 
both temporary and whim-
sical    . Whenever a character 
gains the benefit of the location, 
the DM should roll 1d6 twice, multiplying the result of 
one die roll by the other . After that number of days have 
passed, the special ability ends and the character loses any 
remaining bonus luck rerolls conferred by the location .
 Variation: Olidammara’s shell might appear anywhere 
that is exotic, that is considered to be lucky, or that requires 
extraordinary skill or luck to reach . Such a location might 
be a patch of four-leafed clovers, a tiny island in the middle 
of the ocean, the top of an earthen spire jutting from a 
Olidammara’s shell
Illus. by C. Frank

11
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
flat plain, the peak of a ruined tower, or the depths of a 
wyvern’s lair, as long as it appeals to Olidammara’s sense 
of humor . The bard of the gods enjoys watching the drama 
surrounding his shell play out . He might even appear in 
disguise  to  start  spreading  rumors  of  the  shell’s  latest 
location .
  For even greater enjoyment, sometimes Olidammara 
surrounds the shell with magical effects in addition to 
antimagic  field . Spells such as antipathy,  blade  barrier,  fire 
shield,  prismatic  wall, and  sympathy  are  favorites  of  the 
trickster deity .
 Ability Value: 1,000 gp .
oTYugh hole
Beneath  the  cells  and  barred  yards  of  Saint’s  Cudgel 
prison, below even its darkest, most secret torture pit, lies 
an unfinished earthen basement that holds a crumbling, 
ruined well . This fetid ditch is more than just a filthy 
oubliette—it’s the otyugh hole, the bottomless black, the 
“O” hole, a fearful legend among those who claim to fear 
nothing, and its threat can snap even the maddest rabble-
rouser back into line .
  The most feared punishment within a prison, castle, 
or torturer’s tower, an otyugh hole is a wretched solitary-
confinement pit meant to disgust and break the hardest 
convict . Any who enter face torments of darkness, silence, 
and  dread,  but  those  who  survive  this  ordeal  become 
underworld legends .
 Lore: Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can 
research an otyugh  hole to learn more about it . When a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: An otyugh hole is a prison cesspit where the foulest 
prisoners are punished .
 DC 15: Many forced into otyugh  holes go mad, die, or 
simply  disappear .  Those  who  emerge  intact  are  heroes 
among their fellow felons .
 DC 20: Some jailers purposely or knowingly allow crea-
tures such as ghouls, slimes, or otyughs access to prisoners 
thrown into otyugh holes .
 Description: An otyugh hole is a disgusting, lightless pit 
about 30 feet deep, usually covered with a rusting metal 
hatch . Crudely dug to serve its purpose or converted from 
some other ruined shaft, it reeks with the debris and waste 
that trickles down from above . No sensory stimuli reach 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
PreY
“Don’t look back!”
    Rolands turned to look, slowing for just an instant. That was 
enough. A terrible, huge maw with teeth like swords, enough to 
supply an entire legion, snapped shut. Rolands—or at least, all 
of him from the knees up—was gone in a warm, wet spray.
    Keel flinched briefly but didn’t slow, his fear driving him on 
faster and faster. The ache in his pounding legs grew to a dull 
burn, but any fire he felt, he knew, would be a thousand times 
more  forgiving  than  the  titanic  thing  that  pursued.  The  mon-
strous beast, all claws and scales and massive teeth, made the 
ground pitch with its furious pursuit.
 Have  to  keep  running.  Have  to  keep  going.  Almost  there,  he 
chanted  to  himself,  a  mantra  that  became  harder  to  believe 
with each step. Avoiding thick jungle vines and jumping gnarled 
roots, he ran on. Behind, he could hear trees crack as they tore 
from  the  ground,  splintering  at  the  terrible  lizard’s  passage. 
Bounding,  tumbling,  and  dodging,  Keel  sprinted  through  the 
dense  vegetation.  In  bursts,  he  ran  even  faster  at  the  close 
sound  of  snapping  teeth  and  a  powerful,  too-near  buffet  of 
reeking breath.
    A mighty hiss from up ahead gave Keel a rush of hope. As he 
broke  from  the  tree  line,  a  black  expanse  of  charred  and  split 
earth spread before him. From deep red cracks in the scarred 
land billowed clouds of thick steam. Long, low sighs issued from 
the earth as though from something angry breathing below.
 He had to run even harder now. The thing behind him wasn’t 
being slowed by the jungle; out here it could move even more 
swiftly. Faster!  His  exhausted  legs  nearly  gave  way  at  the  very 
thought,  threatening  to  pitch  him  into  one  of  the  firelit  cre-
vasses. His arms beat the air ahead of him as he threw his body 
forward with each step. He could hear the thunderous footsteps 
picking up speed, each bringing with it the sound of shattering 
obsidian.
    Ahead he could see a new wisp of steam starting to rise from 
a wide gap in the uneven rock. Turning slightly, he ran directly 
for it. The gash grew closer with terrible slowness. 
 You’re not going to make it. You have to make it. Do it. Do it. Do 
it! His exhausted mind argued with itself. He didn’t even care. It 
was all instinct now.
 Ten feet wide? Fifteen feet wide? More? The gap seemed wider 
as he neared, the steam from within getting thicker and billowing 
out faster. Too late to run for another one. It was this or the thing’s 
gut, and Keel wasn’t even sure that he’d get the chance to try his 
luck.
    A  sizzling  hiss  rose  from  the  rock  ahead,  growing  louder, 
more  urgent—the  sound  of  something  coming  to  a  head. 
Seeing the broken rim of the gap, partially obscured by steam, 
Keel threw all his focus into his final steps. Though the hot mist 
scalded  his  face,  he  called  on  every  reserve  of  will  and  terror 
and launched himself into the air above the gap. As he dove for 
the other side, something slammed against his legs, a shearing 
snap that rent the sole from his boot and threw him farther.
 Keel hit the jagged ground, rolling hard over slicing rocks, as the 
hissing behind exploded into the air. A deafening roar of frustra-
tion and terrible pain split the steam like a physical presence as 
the geyser erupted beneath the snapping titan lizard. Its neck and 
head  scorched  by  the  superheated  water,  the  beast  reared  back 
and crashed to the ground. Keel barreled as far from the noise as 
he  could,  then  collapsed  himself,  his  lungs  screaming,  his  legs 
useless. He lay there for a long time, ignoring the light spray of 
hot water.
    When finally the geyser settled and the steam cleared, Keel 
rose on his arms and looked back. The massive lizard still lay 
there, its scaled chest heaving slowly as it breathed its last. 
 Yeah, Keel thought as he tested his legs and awkwardly gained 
his footing, just like I planned.

12
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
those forced into an otyugh hole except the warm wetness 
and gagging reek of its knee-deep putridity .
  Crude graffiti, scrawled by countless previous inmates, 
often lines the lower walls of these horrific prisons . Those 
who  have  survived  an otyugh  hole can  determine  who 
really has endured its torments and who’s a liar by asking 
about such scrawls . One infamous otyugh hole bears the 
frantically  scratched  name,  “Maercson,”  both  a  marker 
and a warning against the tentacled something that lurks 
behind one of the pit’s crumbling walls .
 Prerequisite: A character must be 3rd level or higher 
to gain the special ability conferred by an otyugh hole.
 Location Activation: Gaining the benefits of an otyugh 
hole requires enduring a full week of existence within it . 
The difficulty of this achievement depends on the state of 
the pit, the level of guard activity surrounding it, and the 
attentiveness of any creatures that scour the pit for food . 
Gaining access to an otyugh  hole—a place that officials 
deny even exists—might be a challenge as well .
  One difference between an otyugh  hole and the other 
legendary sites described here is that a lawbreaking char-
acter might end up visiting (and thus gaining the benefit 
of) an otyugh hole without intentionally seeking it out .
 Recharge:  While  any  number  of  characters  could 
receive its special ability, an otyugh hole can grant its benefit 
only once per week, and only to a single character (since it 
is a form of solitary confinement) . The site gains its power 
from its exclusivity: Should a large number come to know 
the pit’s details and claim (truly or not) to have weathered 
its foulness, the exceptional accomplishment of enduring 
the otyugh hole is cheapened and the site’s benefits fade .
 Special Ability: A character who has endured a week 
in an otyugh hole gains a noticeable edge to his personality, 
which manifests as a bonus feat chosen from the following 
list: Extend Rage (see the sidebar), Iron Will, Menacing 
Demeanor (see the sidebar), or Skill Focus (Intimidate) . 
The character must still meet the normal prerequisite for 
the feat chosen .
 Duration: The emotional scars, and the resulting per-
sonality change, resulting from confinement in an otyugh 
hole are permanent .
 Ability Value: 3,000 gp .
ConTaCT  s
As presented in Dungeon Master’s Guide II, contacts provide 
characters  of  any  class  with  allies  willing  to  perform 
simple tasks and services on their behalf . More than paid 
hirelings but less than dutiful cohorts, contacts might 
best be described as dependable friends or acquaintances . 
PCs have taken the time to become friendly with these 
individuals  and  might  seek  to  take  advantage  of  their 
advice, skills, and abilities .
  Contacts can also add new roleplaying opportunities to 
a campaign . Even if the PCs are merely seeking general 
advice or a minor bonus on some skill check, a contact 
can provide such benefits in a more detailed and flavorful 
manner than exchanges with hirelings and shopkeepers . 
For example, a character who wants to know about a spe-
cific monster might have a conversation with a learned 
contact;  considering  the  situation  from  another  angle 
might allow her to reroll a previously failed Knowledge 
check with the benefit of the contact’s aid . Contacts can 
also  provide  benefits  beyond  minor  skill  and  ability 
bonuses . If the PCs need to deal with the warlike Tongue-
gnaw barbarian tribe, approaching a single member and 
gaining his friendship could secure a friendly introduc-
tion to the chief and warnings against acts that might be 
cultural taboos .
  The aid provided by a contact is a service that doesn’t 
cost the contact anything and doesn’t jeopardize his life . 
In  general,  this  aid  involves  simple,  harmless  tasks  he 
can perform with ease . What contacts of varying levels 
consider an easy task, though, depends on their skill level . 
A 1st-level warrior would never dare enter the ankheg tun-
nels winding beneath a farmer’s fields, but an 18th-level 
wizard might think nothing of casting a few spells down 
the creatures’ holes to clear out the infestation . Dungeon 
Master’s  Guide  II  offers  a  number  of  mid-level  example 
contacts, demonstrating the versatility and variety of such 
allies . This section expands on that concept, presenting 
additional sample contacts appropriate for characters from 
the lowest to highest levels .
gaInIng a ConTaCT
A PC wishing to gain a contact must first select an NPC . 
If that person’s attitude toward the character is worse than 
helpful, the first step must be to adjust the NPC’s attitude 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
exTend rage
You are able to maintain your rage longer than most.
	   Prerequisite:	Rage or frenzy ability.
 Benefit:	Each  use  of  your  rage  or  frenzy  ability  lasts  an  ad-
ditional 5 rounds beyond its normal duration.
 Special:	You can take this feat multiple times. The effects of 
multiple feats stack.
    This feat first appeared in Complete Warrior.
MenaCI  ng deMeanor [raCI  al]
You can tap into your savage heritage to improve your intimida-
tion techniques.
	   Prerequisite:	Orc blood or orc subtype.
 Benefit:	You gain a +4 bonus on your Intimidate checks.
    This feat first appeared in Races of Destiny.

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
to helpful 
by making 
a  successful 
Diplomacy check . 
(A  character  can 
make  someone  do  a 
favor  for  him  with  In-
timidate,  but  he  can’t  gain  a 
long-term contact with this skill .) 
Once  the  NPC’s  attitude  is  helpful,  the 
player simply declares his intent to make that 
NPC a contact for his character .
  A PC can have a number of contacts equal to her Cha-
risma bonus (minimum one) . In addition, a character 
who joins a guild (DMG II 223) gains one extra guild 
contact . In this system, a character does not automati-
cally gain contacts upon attaining new levels . When a 
new slot opens for a contact, a PC must find and recruit 
one in the usual way .
Contacts of different levels
While gaining access to contacts has no level requirement, 
a low-level character is likely to find a high-level NPC much 
more difficult to impress than one of similar experience . 
Even  if  a  PC  does  manage  to  gain  the  friendship  of  a 
significantly higher-level NPC, that contact might have 
more pressing responsibilities that prevent her from aiding 
a low-level character, or limit the number of times her aid 
might be called on .
  The DM might impose a limitation to prevent PCs from 
acquiring significantly higher-level contacts . In such a 
case, a character can gain only contacts whose level does 
not exceed her class level + her Cha modifier . For example, 
a 3rd-level PC with a Charisma of 14 might be able to gain 
contacts of up to 5th level; those of 6th level or higher are 
simply too skilled or busy to respond to her needs .
Contacts of different attitudes
The DM should also consider the nature of individual 
NPCs when determining what contacts a PC might be able 
to acquire and retain . Even characters of the same class 
might hold wildly differing outlooks, intentions, or align-
ments, making them unlikely to work together . If a cleric 
who serves Heironeous tries to make a contact of a follower 
of Hextor, he is unlikely to succeed . The Diplomacy skill 
already takes into account such differences: Only the most 
charismatic PCs can sufficiently improve the attitude of a 
character with a wildly opposing philosophy or of a fervent 
enemy to gain her as a contact . Most characters probably 
wouldn’t want to . Thus, DMs should usually concern them-
selves more with what contacts would benefit a character 
than with trying to restrict PCs from gaining contacts 
they probably wouldn’t pursue to begin with .
exa  MP  le ConTaCT  s
The  tables  of  contacts  presented  here  and  in Dungeon 
Master’s Guide II offer little more than a rough outline of 
what abilities such characters might perform . A typical 
contact won’t put himself in danger on the PCs’ behalf, so 
complete details of one’s every skill and feat aren’t neces-
sary, but a rough outline and general description of the 
contact’s personality can be helpful .
Contacts can provide 
characters with useful 
information
Illus. by E. Deschamps

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
  Unless  otherwise  noted,  a  contact’s  skill  modifier 
should equal that NPC’s character level + 5 . In rare cases 
(particularly for high-level contacts), this modifier might 
increase by another +5 to reflect a higher ability score or 
some other improvement to the skill .
  The following entries expand on some of the contacts 
presented  in  Tables  6–1  through  6–3,  providing  more 
detailed descriptions of their services and attitudes ready 
for use in your campaign . Expanded characters are noted 
with an asterisk (*) in their table entries .
low-level Contacts
The following low-level contacts expand on three of the 
entries in Table 6–1: Sample Low-Level Contacts .
 Jariss  Astor: A flighty elf runaway barely fifty years 
old, Jariss (CN male elf bard 1) is known for his love of 
song, dance, and general excess, as well as his numerous 
unseemly  acquaintances .  Upbeat,  excitable,  and  easily 
distracted,  Jariss  boldly  claims  to  know  about  all  the 
best parties in town and, for the right price, can get you 
anything you want .
Table 6–1: Sample Low-Level Contacts
Contact	Class	Favors	Provided	at	No	Charge	Frequency
Alkjavalk Mornbird Barbarian 2 Introduction to her tribe’s ways Once
Jariss Astor* Bard 1 Direct toward best locations in town 1/week
Emry Sharv Cleric 2 Identify an object’s religious significance (see Knowledge [religion]) 1/week
Tem of the Crying Sun Druid 3 Reveal the location of nearest druid circle Once
Lt. Moira Keener* Fighter 2 Spar (suggest weapons, techniques, future feats) 1/month
Stone Over Air Monk 3 Debate philosophy (reroll and aid one failed Knowledge check) 1/month
Abelard Albrecht Volker Paladin 2 Report misdeeds to higher-ranking members of his faith Once
Dram Cicaeda Ranger 1 Draw a map to a nearby location 1/month
Firechild Sorcerer 2 Spy or scout with familiar 1/month
Catsy Duprei Wizard 1 Cast detect magic or prestidigitation 1/week
Joul the Eye* Adept 3 Divine the future (not magical) 1/month
Timdal “J.C.” Bothol Commoner 2 Report on local rumors or agricultural concerns (see Knowledge [local]) 1/week
Table 6–2: Sample Mid-Level Contacts
Contact	Class	Favors	Provided	at	No	Charge	Frequency
Wildcat Rodorsson Barbarian 5 Help train an animal for a purpose (see Handle Animal) Once
Cynric the Pure Cleric 5 Provide healing (cure light wounds) 1/month
Farhaan Nicabar* Cleric 6 Smooth over trouble with local authorities  Once
Agosti of the  Wizard 5 Translate any nonmagical script 1/week
   Shadow Shore 
Deogol Knifethrower Rogue 4 Forge a document 1/month
Nisha of the Many Eyes* Rogue 7 Gather intelligence about any one local person Once
Ialdabode Psion Use read thoughts on one captive 1/month
 (telepath) 3
Jal Omari Soulknife 3 Accompany individual on one adventure up to 1 day in length Once
Orkatz of the Green City Expert 5 Help research a specific topic (+2 bonus on PC’s Knowledge check) 1/week
Vasili the Fat Expert 5 Appraise an art item, a piece of jewelry, or a gem 1/week
Table 6–3: Sample High-Level Contacts
Contact	Class	Favors	Provided	at	No	Charge	Frequency
Dogfish Barbarian 15 Scout for one day Once
Glitterdust Bard 14 Make a Perform check (no bardic music) Once
Valkus Dun Cleric 18 Grant access to a temple’s resources (use library, holy water, relic,  Once
  borrow a minor magic item )
Derecho Druid 16 Divine the will of nature (see Knowledge [nature]) 1/month
Einhander Fighter 13 Make an Intimidate check Once
The Hundred-Handed Monk 15 Break an object 1/month
Joras “Death Ender”  Paladin 16 Use remove disease Once
    Mace 
Tien, Green  Ranger 17 Reveal a monster’s weakness (see Knowledge) 1/month
    Sunder’s Bane 
The Fifth-Story Man* Rogue 17 Provide access to a location Once
Xix Zam the  Sorcerer 16 Make a Spellcraft check 1/month
    Dragon-Eyed 
Master Ironhand* Expert 19 Determine where special materials might be found Once
*Described more extensively in the accompanying text.

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
  Those who gain Jariss as a contact can ask him to direct 
them toward taverns, clubs, black-market dens, and shady 
dealers of all types once per week . His Knowledge (local) 
skill check has a +8 bonus .
  Characters  trying  to  make  Jariss  a  contact  gain  a  +2 
circumstance bonus on their Diplomacy checks if they 
dance with the incorrigible elf or ply him with alcohol .
 Lieutenant  Moira  Keener: A low-ranking member 
of the local militia, Moira (LN female dwarf fighter 2) is a 
no-nonsense officer with an eye for fine weapons . Though 
straitlaced  and  dedicated  to  upholding  the  law,  Moira 
drops some of her uptightness when training and during 
practice duels, reveling in the quick-witted strategy she 
loves .
  Characters who make the lieutenant a contact find her 
willing to spar and offer advice on their fighting tech-
nique . This advice might translate into suggestions for 
more effective weaponry, options to use in combat (such 
as the Tumble skill or actions such as disarm), or recom-
mendations for future feats . She offers such assistance only 
once per month . If your campaign requires PCs to pay for 
training (see DMG 197) or retraining (see PH2 194), Moira 
can reduce the necessary time and cost by 25% .
  Characters trying to make Moira a contact gain a +2 
circumstance bonus on their Diplomacy checks if they 
express a technical knowledge of combat or fine weaponry . 
This bonus rises to +5 if they’ve helped bring a criminal 
to justice .
 Joul   the   Eye: A  strange  half-orc  with  a  missing 
eye—which  he  frequently  replaces  with  a  variety  of 
disturbing baubles—Joul (CE male half-orc adept 3) is 
dramatic  and  quick  to  anger .  He  claims  to  foresee  the 
future by interpreting the positions of items moved by 
his “pet” monstrous spider, Zhul . Although he is largely 
a con artist, the half-orc’s knowledge of mystical forces 
and of the criminal underworld allows him to imbue his 
fortune-telling with an element of illicit truth .
  Characters  who  make  Joul  a  contact  can  ask  him  to 
divine  their  futures  or  interpret  their  paths  once  per 
month . His answer might merely be a Bluff attempt but 
usually  includes  veiled  information  using  Knowledge 
(arcana), Knowledge (local), or Knowledge (the planes) . 
Joul has a +5 bonus on his Bluff check and a +8 bonus on 
checks involving these three Knowledge skills .
  Characters  trying  to  make  Joul  a  contact  gain  a  +2 
circumstance bonus on their Diplomacy checks if they 
seem appropriately disturbed by his missing eye . However, 
they take a –5 penalty on such checks if they mention any 
disgust for or aversion to spiders .
Mid-level Contacts
The following mid-level contacts expand on two of the 
characters presented in Dungeon Master’s Guide II. For ease 
of reference, the table from that book is reproduced on the 
facing page as Table 6–2: Sample Mid-Level Contacts .
 Farhaan Nicabar: A grandfatherly cleric of Pelor, Far-
haan Nicabar (NG male human cleric 6) is a well-known 
local figure, having treated many in times of sickness and 
presided over the births and weddings of the majority of 
folk in town . An ever-open ear, a welcoming smile, and an 
uncanny ability to remember faces and names make the 
patient priest easy to love, while his years of experience 
and even temper make him convincing in counsel .
  Ever forgiving, Farhaan is willing to use his influence 
to help people extricate themselves from unseemly cir-
cumstances . Employing a wide number of contacts about 
town, calling in personal favors, and noting his own past 
aid, the soft-spoken cleric can often calm flaring tempers 
without even needing to make a Diplomacy check (if one 
is needed, he has a +13 modifier on the check) .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
under The InfluenCe
The following excerpts come from the diary of young Princess 
Triela,  begun  shortly  after  her  arranged  wedding  to  the  dark-
hearted King Xethor of Aram. 
 The	fourth	day	of	the	third	month,	two	days	after	Triela	took	
up	residence	in 	the	palace: “There is a particular creature of dra-
conic appearance but no more than the size of a cat who roams 
the  halls  of  this  castle.  I  have  spoken  to  her,  and  to  my  utter 
joy  and  amazement,  she  responded  in  kind.  She  calls  herself 
Zoetebak, a pseudodragon and advisor to my husband. I asked 
her what she advises him on, and she said, ‘Being a good man.’ 
I only hope he heeds her advice.”
 The	ninth	day	of	the	third	month: “Today my lord proclaimed 
himself protector of children of the realm, and declared that no 
child would go hungry. The people cheered. The nobles glow-
ered. Zoetebak sat smugly atop a wardrobe, nodding as my lord 
spoke. I believe this must have been her idea.”
 The	twenty-third	day	of	the	fourth	month: “I fear the count of 
Sithran, and have brought him to the attention of Zoetebak. She 
says she will speak with my lord.”
 The	first	day	of	the	fifth	month:	“Koro, the young captain of 
the guard, returned today from patrolling Sithran. His reports 
are dire, but Zoetebak seems unconcerned.” 
 The	second	day	of	the	fifth	month: “Today my husband pro-
moted Koro. Zoetebak looked on with satisfaction.”
 The	seventh	day	of	the	fifth	month: “I overheard my husband 
speaking  with  Zoetebak.  She  advised  him  to  distribute  gold, 
bread, and water to the orphanages and poverty-stricken parts 
of  the  city.  He  seemed  hesitant  until  she  mentioned  how  it 
would  strengthen  the  loyalty  of  his  subjects  and  weaken  the 
power of Sithran. He quickly agreed.”
 The	second	day	of	the	ninth	month:  “Koro  today  presented 
the count of Sithran to Xethor in chains. Zoetebak accused him 
of treason, to which he admitted guilt and begged for leniency. 
May Heironeous have mercy on his soul.”

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
  Characters  trying  to  make  Joul  a  contact  gain  a  +2 
circumstance bonus on their Diplomacy checks if they 
are fellow clerics of Pelor or can tell a good joke . 
 Nisha of the Many Eyes: The seductive owner of the 
Peacock’s Perch, a high-class tavern and secret den of vice, 
Nisha (NE female half-elf rogue 7) does business with the 
elite of both the nobility and the underworld . The halfling 
slavers aboard the Four-Armed Kraken, the sannish runners 
of the south, the foppish scions of House Goldenbough, 
and the Lord Mayor himself—Nisha knows them all . With 
a deadly smile and a sultry saunter, she and her associates 
can find out anything for a friend .
  Characters who make Nisha a contact can entreat her 
for information about any local personality, drawing on 
her vast network . This results in her making a Knowledge 
(local) check with a +12 bonus or a Gather Information 
check with a +16 bonus . If she can find out nothing about 
the person in question, such a failed check does not count 
as a use of her favor . Nisha can perform this service for 
PCs more than once, but only the first time is free .
  Characters trying to make Nisha a contact gain a +2 cir-
cumstance bonus on their Diplomacy checks if they have 
illicit goods to sell and make an agreement to bring similar 
such goods to her first in future . However, characters with 
lawful alignments take a –2 penalty on such checks .
high-level Contacts
The following high-level contacts expand on two of the 
entries in Table 6–3: Sample High-Level Contacts .
 The Fifth-Story Man: A bold thief and incredibly adroit 
cat burglar, the mysterious figure who calls himself the 
Fifth-Story Man (N male human rogue 17) is difficult to 
pin down . What few know is that he steals only items he 
considers stolen by their current owners, whether gold 
extorted by a petty crime boss or a royal heirloom captured 
during an ancient war . In every case, a strange sense of 
justice pervades the Fifth-Story Man’s work .
  Characters who track down the Fifth-Story Man and 
gain his trust might request his aid in unlawful entry . 
The cat burglar does extensive research before each of his 
crimes . He is skilled at detecting and avoiding even the 
cleverest magic trap and knows the richest homes in the 
city   . His assistance might involve climbing a symbol-warded 
wall  and  throwing  down  a  rope,  drugging  a  guardian 
monster, or simply mentioning a secret back door .
  The most difficult part of gaining the Fifth-Story Man’s 
aid is tracking him down, since he has a high price on his 
head    . Once characters do meet him, though, and convince 
him that they’re not out for his reward, he is quite friendly . 
Strangely,  due  to  his  skewed  sense  of  justice,  lawful 
characters gain a +2 circumstance bonus on Diplomacy 
checks to deal with the Fifth-Story Man, while those who 
are openly thieves take a –4 penalty on such checks .
 Master Ironhand: Upon first glance, few would guess 
that  Gimbol  Ironhand  (NG  male  gnome  expert  19)  is 
a famed master crafter . Serious for a gnome and with a 
keen attention to detail, Master Ironhand is a blacksmith, 
inventor, geologist, and archeologist of a kind . He has 
undertaken extensive research into the rarest materials 
and minerals, as well as into the boneworking and metal-
lurgical  techniques  of  a  dozen  different  cultures,  both 
modern and ancient . Few can match the gnome’s skill at 
working in adamantine, red steel, green steel, mithral, or 
even dragonhide .
  Characters who make Master Ironhand a contact can 
draw on his knowledge of rich sources of rare minerals or 
materials . Master Ironhand uses his extensive Appraise, 
Knowledge (geography), and Profession (blacksmith) skills 
to provide information about the provenance of a rare item 
or substance (he receives a +30 bonus on each check) .
  Characters trying to make Master Ironhand a contact 
gain a +5 circumstance bonus on their Diplomacy checks 
if they can show the gnome an item of a material he has 
never seen before .
one hundred 
sC oundrel Challenges
The following selection of story ideas should help inspire 
a Dungeon Master looking for adventure seeds and ways 
to incorporate scoundrels into a campaign .
d%	  Challenge
01  Talk your way out of a bargain with a kolyarut.
02  Become leader of a thieves’ guild.
03  Negotiate peace between a town and a lizardfolk tribe.
04     Recover a stolen museum display, then steal it later for 
yourself.
05  Track down a kenku thieves’ guild.
06     Investigate  a  connection  between  city  guards  and  a 
thieves’ guild.
07  Convince a lich to make a powerful magic item.
08     Break  into  a  noble’s  heavily  guarded  mansion  because 
you can.
09  Fly to a distant land on the back of a roc.
10     Forge an alliance of gnomes and halflings to attack the 
larger races.
11  Take a half-orc barbarian to the royal opera.
12     Join  a  rebellion  you  don’t  care  about  for  the  sake  of 
someone you love.
13     Convince a group of azers to open up shop in the City 
of Glass.
14  Bring together lovers separated by their families.
15     Explain to a mummy why you have a right to enter its 
tomb.
16  Fake the assassination of a monarch you despise.
17  Attend a ball in disguise without the use of magic.
18  Distract the city watch as a gang fight occurs nearby.
19     Convince a horde of hobgoblins that you’re an avatar 
of Erythnul.
20  Smuggle a bored prince or princess out of the country.

1
Cha  PT  er 6
sC oundrel
 
adven
Tures
21  Spy on and participate in a secret druid ritual.
22  Pass a message to an inmate in a secure prison.
23       Retrieve a gnome relic from the belly of a purple worm.
24  Lead a group of drow to the surface so they can raid.
25  Prevent a tyrant from coming to power.
26  Place a commoner on the throne.
27  Convince a wizard her magic has stopped working.
28     Track  down  a  mortally  wounded  ranger’s  dead  animal 
companion to bury with him.
29  Peacefully get a wing of gargoyles to leave a castle.
30     Infiltrate and expose a wererat den that the city guards 
don’t believe exists.
31  Tame Thunderhoof, prince of the hippogriffs.
32 Start a thieves’ guild to compete with an existing one.
33  Wrangle a panicking dire bear out of a crowded city.
34     Reunite a half-orc with the parent who didn’t raise him.
35  Convince dwarf miners to unearth an ancient creature.
36  Kill a sorcerer before he can cast a spell.
37  Ambush the tax shipment of an evil empire.
38  Convert a cleric to a different faith.
39  Break a popular rebel out of prison.
40  Find the answer to a question said to be impossible to 
discern.
41  Make a false claim to the imperial throne.
42  Convince  rival  gangs  to  join  together  to  form  a  larger 
thieves’ guild.
43  Convince a githyanki slaver to free a valuable captive.
44  Free a condemned prisoner from the gallows.
45  Capture a tyrannosaurus for a wealthy city zoo.
46  Bring a militant druid into the largest city.
47  Perpetrate a con on a devil, raksasha, or yugoloth.
48  Defeat an elf in an archery contest by cheating.
49  Reveal the doppelganger hiding in the city senate.
50  Enter politics.
51  Escape a deserted island.
52  Lose a hound archon ranger.
53       Convince a paladin to keep an illegal or immoral secret.
54  Stop a group of city leaders from opening a portal to the 
Far Realm.
55     Purchase a storm giant’s castle without gold, gems, or 
magic items.
56  Become the leader of an assassins’ guild.
57  Befriend a gray render.
58  Convince a red dragon to give up a piece of its hoard.
59 Learn the location of a lost vault from a greedy ghost.
60  Deliver a love letter from a surface dweller to a drow in 
a subterranean city.
61  Compel a cleric of Nerull to return a lost friend to life.
62  Sing an insulting song about the king to his face—and 
live to tell about it.
63    Raise funds from a gold dragon to start a thieves’ guild.
64  Assassinate a monarch you like.
65  Court a noble scion under his parents’ noses.
66  Uncover who is sending death threats to a hated public 
official.
67  Bargain for passage through a behir’s territory.
68  Kidnap a wizard’s familiar and hold it for ransom.
69     Take a mistakenly teleported merfolk back to a distant 
ocean in less than a day.
70  Convince a barbarian she’s really a sorcerer who can cast 
powerful spells.
71  Perform for an army of orcs.
72  Stop a vigilante from killing thieves’ guild members.
73  “Borrow” a hag eye from a covey of sea hags.
74    Expose the beloved mayor as an evil cultist slowly poison-
ing the populace.
75     Compel a babau and a hound archon to work together 
against a legion of devils.
76  Join  a  temple  of  St.  Cuthbert  as  a  spy  for  a  temple  of 
Olidammara.
77     Track the source of a crime spree back to an ethereal 
filcher.
78  Put a monk on the throne of a barbarian kingdom and 
keep her there.
79     Join an order of wizards without being able to cast 
spells.
80    Disguise a wealthy merchant as a pauper to let him watch 
customers in the market.
81     Convince deep dwarves, derro, and duergar to 
cooperate in opening the lost Vault Beneath the 
Mountain.
82  Infiltrate a drow city to assassinate a svirfneblin traitor.
83     Help an adventurous prince or princess escape the 
palace.
84  Forge  a  strike  force  of  half-elves  who  report  directly  to 
the elf king.
85     Convince a treant to leave the doomed forest it has 
occupied for centuries.
86  Destroy a thieves’ guild.
87     Win a fighting tournament using a weapon you’re not 
proficient with.
88  Assassinate an imprisoned assassin. Make it look like it’s 
not a murder.
89  Enter a scintillating color pool on the Astral Plane.
90  Hunt down a spellthief and bring him to a wizards’ guild 
for justice.
91  Steal the sacred scrolls of a clan of ninjas.
92  Smuggle a vampire into a city.
93     Use your soul as a bargaining chip in a deal with a 
devourer.
94  Broker a peace agreement between dwarves and orcs.
95  Explore the burial city of the elder elves.
96  Ambush a scout-led group of irregulars.
97     Back out of a bargain with a powerful crime 
syndicate—and survive.
98  Bring a choir of harpies to sing at a bards’ college.
99  Persuade a red dragon to become a dracolich.
100  Convince an archon to break a contract.
pqqqqqqqqqrs
abouT T  he des Igners
MIKE  McARTOR  and  F.  WESLEY  SCHNEIDER  are  associate 
editors  for Dragon  magazine.  Mike  was  one  of  the  designers 
for Spell Compendium, while Complete Scoundrel is Wes’s first 
design job for Wizards of the Coast. 
pqqqqqqqqqrs





