Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
immorality; some scoundrels flout every law on the books 
to do what they feel is right .
 Scoundrels think on their feet. Scoundrels do or say 
anything to get what they want, reacting to situations with 
nary a moment’s notice . Knowing that an opportunity 
present in one moment might vanish in the next, they act 
immediately and deal with the repercussions later . Even 
in battle, scoundrels constantly look for ways to turn any 
situation to their advantage .
 Scoundrels avoid fair fights. If scoundrels don’t have 
an edge over an opponent or in a situation, they prefer 
to retreat and try their luck again later . More aggressive 
scoundrels do everything they can to force an opponent to 
make a mistake and give them an advantage . Keen-witted 
scoundrels cunningly manipulate situations to improve 
their odds .
 Scoundrels know their enemies’ weaknesses. Scoun-
drels are quick to seek out and exploit chinks in their 
opponents’ armor . Taking advantage of weakness might be 
as complex as conning a rich, lovelorn widow, or as simple 
as stabbing someone who can’t defend himself .
 Scoundrels don’t restrict themselves. 
Although a scoundrel might have a personal 
code of ethics, most view restrictions such 
as laws and morals as impediments that 
complicate and add danger to their 
dealings . This attitude might seem 
selfish, but for scoundrels it is 
a necessity of survival .
 Scoundrels  get  dirty. 
They don’t sit back and let 
others do all their work . 
They’re willing to par-
ticipate in every aspect 
of an operation or ad-
venture . Some do this 
out  of  arrogant  confi-
dence in their skills; others 
act  out  of  love  of  a  good 
challenge .
 Scoundrels  apply  them-
selves. Scoundrels are motivated 
by drives and desires . These might 
be  specific  ambitions,  such  as 
money,  revenge,  love,  freedom, 
or fame, more general passions for 
action, thrills, adventure, and may-
hem, or even mere curiosity .
 Scoundrels rely on instinct. They act 
when they sense the time is right . This in-
stinct might merely be luck, but it is often 
tempered by experience and an individual 
scoundrel’s sense of a person or situation . 
Scoundrels consider how others think, or at least guess 
how they would react in a situation, and from that often 
anticipate their opponents .
 Scoundrels are not all corrupt. Although many are 
less than moral paragons, scoundrels can use deception 
to right wrongs, trick the unjust, and do away with vil-
lains . Even the least materialistic might rob from the 
rich and give to the poor, or perform similar daring acts 
of charity .
sC oundrels of  
anY alIgn  Men  T
Not all scoundrels are criminals . This section presents 
scoundrel characters of every D&D alignment, along with 
well-known examples of each .
 Lawful  Good: Lawful good scoundrels have their 
own personal, implacable code of honor and righteous-
ness    . They have good intentions, but they aren’t above 
breaking minor rules that get in the way of the greater 
good, especially when helping the downtrodden . Such 
scoundrels are likely to form far-reaching plans to ben-
efit themselves and others . The former law enforcer who 
challenges a corrupt government or an adventurer 
who wants to liberate great works of art for 
the enjoyment of the world is a lawful 
good scoundrel .
   Examples:  Batman,  Dick  Tracy,  and 
Indiana Jones .
    Lawful  Neutral:  Scoun-
drels  of  this  alignment  care 
little for good or evil, using 
their cunning to uphold 
the strictures of law or tra-
dition while at the same 
time manipulating these 
codes to benefit themselves . 
Working within these systems 
provides lawful neutral scoundrels 
with advantages they wouldn’t otherwise 
have access to . Such scoundrels are likely to form 
far-reaching plans to help themselves .
   Examples:  James  Bond,  Odysseus,  and  Sanjuro, 
the title character from Yojimbo.
   Lawful Evil: Lawful evil scoundrels have a self-
ish and corrupt outlook . They profit from loopholes and 
unjust aspects of laws, regardless of whom else their 
actions affect . They might belong to a crimi-
nal structure or follow a perverse code 
of honor . Such scoundrels use their 
charm and guile to manipulate oth-
ers to get what they want, sometimes 
leading whole organizations or play-
ing groups against one another to gain 
the greatest benefit .
   Examples: Boba Fett of Star  Wars and 
Magneto from X-Men .
 Neutral Good: Scoundrels of this alignment use their 
talents to do what they judge best at the moment without 
Some scoundrels turn their skills  
to more than just greed
Illus. by R. Gallegos


Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
regard for legal niceties . They work within the law if 
doing so is the easiest path, but they are not beholden to 
it  . Neutral good scoundrels are often kind people who 
get by on their charm or help others through the use of 
extraordinary skill .
 Examples: Zorro and Spider-Man .
 Neutral: Scoundrels of this alignment are opportun-
ists   . They are concerned with themselves above all others, 
taking whatever they can get, although not purposely 
trying to hurt anyone else . Tomb robbers, wheeler-dealer 
merchants, and other purely selfish scoundrels typify 
this alignment .
 Examples: Lara Croft, Han Solo (at least in his early 
appearances), and Lucy Westerna from Dracula .
 Neutral Evil: Scoundrels of this alignment are self-
ish, taking whatever they can from whomever they wish 
whenever they can get away with it . Exploiting the needs 
and fears of others, these scoundrels are remorseless liars 
and cheaters . Some realize that patience can yield a greater 
reward than immediate action, and thus might slowly 
milk a patron or community over a long period . Snake-oil 
hawkers, cheating gamblers, and cruel brigands represent 
a few scoundrels of this alignment .
 Examples: Mystique from X-Men and Sawyer from the 
Lost television show .
 Chaotic Good: Chaotic good scoundrels use their skills 
to help others regardless of the consequences . They act as 
their conscience dictates without concern for the laws, 
traditions, or beliefs of others . Such scoundrels are likely 
to make sacrifices in the hope of attaining some future 
good . Benevolent brigands, revolutionaries, and other 
noble rogues possess this alignment .
 Examples: Malcolm Reynolds from Firef ly, Starbuck 
from Battlestar Galactica, and Robin Hood .
 Chaotic Neutral: Scoundrels of this alignment have no 
concept of possession, right, or wrong . They take and do 
what they want on the slightest whim . They are concerned 
with their own needs and freedoms over those of anyone 
else   . Chaotic neutral scoundrels are often mercenaries, 
pirates, or smugglers .
 Examples: Captain Jack Sparrow from the Pirates  of 
the Caribbean films, Al Swearengen from the Deadwood 
television show, and Snake Plissken from Escape  from 
New York .
 Chaotic  Evil:  Scoundrels  of  this  alignment  take 
whatever they can, disregarding the needs of others . 
Unlikely to plan, they don’t think about future necessities 
or gains but take what’s immediately available . Because 
these scoundrels care for nothing, sometimes not even 
themselves, they risk everything for even the slightest 
gain    . Such scoundrels might be incorrigible con artists, 
assassins, or cat burglars .
 Examples: Carl Denham from the King  Kong film and 
Riddick from Pitch Black .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
beh  Ind The Throne
“My lord, this must be decided now!”
    “You  can’t  seriously  expect  the  people  of  the  ancient  and 
noble Duchy of Ird to agree to those terms.”
    “You  could  always  surrender  your  lands,  then,  if  you  feel 
yourself unfit to sway the opinions of your rabble.”
 “Wh—what  did  you  say?  The  people  of  Ird  are  of  a  f ine 
and gallant stock. Had you but one grain of wit you’d know 
that the fathers of our f irst great king were Irdmen, and their 
fathers . . .”
 The two governors bickered on and on, just as they had for 
nearly an hour. With each new surge of outrage their greasy 
jowls and round bellies f lapped wildly. The king had stopped 
listening long ago, watching the rolls of quaking flab as though 
gazing into the ocean surf—but these waves brought only re-
newed contempt and revulsion. He raised his hand for silence, 
but the nobles argued on. A quiet clearing of the throat was 
similarly ignored.
    “That’s enough!” His Majesty rumbled, his voice loud but 
not enough to echo in the long hall. That silenced them, though 
neither of them looked to their liege with respect. “I have heard 
your dispute. I now seek the counsel of silence. Both of you 
will wait here for my return.” Hefting his thick robes, the king 
rose and departed his throne room, entering the airy and book-
lined space of his personal meeting chamber. 
    His Majesty sat upon one of the overstuffed leather chairs 
surrounding the hall’s large, circular conference table. He doffed 
his crown and laid his forehead against the cool, polished wood. 
“I should have the whole lot of them axed,” he sighed.
    “Then who would send you all those shiny bribes—er, gifts?” 
came a hissing voice.
    The king didn’t even look up until he felt a buffet of air and 
heard the click of tiny claws upon the table. He rolled his head 
to behold a reptilian visage covered with deep purple scales, 
f ixing him with a pair of cunning, slitted eyes. The cat-sized 
dragonling had stretched over his crown, propping its long 
neck over one bejeweled crest, a snakelike tongue flitting from 
its wide mouth.
 “You know I don’t care about their baubles.” He sighed again. 
“They keep the best for themselves anyway. The rest of it’s just 
junk they steal from their peasants.” The king sat up and flopped 
against the back of his chair. “I just wish they’d stop fighting and 
leave. There are better ways for me to waste my time.”
    “Let them fight,” came the sibilant response.
    “What?” scoffed the king. 
    “Go ahead. Why not?”
    “They’ll be at each other’s throats and on to civil war, that’s 
why not.”
 “So? Rivton is an incompetent, and Ird seeks to put his grand-
son on the throne. Both are nothing now, but they could soon 
become threats.” The pseudodragon flicked its tongue before 
continuing.  “Let  them  war  against  each  other.  Then,  when 
they’re both weakened, sweep them away.” 
    The king’s knitted brow slowly unfurrowed. Without a word, 
His Majesty stood and purposefully strode from the chamber. 
Smiling broadly, the draconic schemer took to the air, looking 
for a sunny spot to lie.
    It was a good day not to be the king.

10
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
sC oundrels  
of anY Class
The words “scoundrel” and “rogue” have similar mean-
ings, but one does not need to be a member of the rogue 
character class to be a scoundrel . While rogues often 
do adopt the lives of daring and cunning common to 
scoundrels, so can barbarians, bards, rangers, and sor-
cerers . In fact, nothing prevents members of any class 
from taking up lives ruled by their own wit and 
resourcefulness .
  Each  class  from  the 
Player’s Handbook can be 
infused  with  a  bit  of 
scoundrel  flavor .  For 
more concrete examples 
on how to build a vari-
ety of scoundrels from 
class  archetypes,  see 
Making a Scoundrel 
on page 12 .
 Barbarians: 
Barbarians  move 
fast  and  strike 
hard  to  get  what 
they want, refusing 
to  let  anything  stand 
in their way . They are 
in tune with their in-
stincts and the harsh 
realities of the world . 
In the remote wilds, 
barbarian scoundrels 
resort  to  lives  of  thug-
gery  and  brigandage 
in  order  to  survive . 
In more civilized en-
vironments, they make 
lives  for  themselves 
by  putting  their  un-
couth natures to work 
beneath  the  veneer  of 
law  and  justice .  Flexing  a 
few muscles and letting out an 
intimidating roar can get barbarian scoun-
drels anything they want .
 Bards:  Bard  scoundrels  are  talented 
con artists and manipulators . Using their verbal skill 
and natural charm, they can influence even the most 
somber, standoffish, or disagreeable individual with a 
few sly words and a well-placed smile . Bards have the 
uncanny  ability  to  sway  large  groups  of  people,  gain 
allies, and manipulate opinion, always with an eye toward 
gaining fame, information, or any other goals they desire . 
Keen-witted and quick studies, they can formulate plans 
in mere seconds, relying on general knowledge to find a 
way around a trap, or more specific information to wield 
the perfect bargaining chip .
 Clerics: Piety often brings with it a certain authority . 
Wielding a deity’s magic and communing with unknow-
able powers, clerics have knowledge from beyond this 
world and can draw on belief—both their own and that 
of others—to get what they want . Clerics of trickster 
deities or deities that favor cunning, debauchery, and 
theft often turn to the path of the scoundrel, trusting in 
their skill and their faith to see them 
through . Clever worshipers of oth-
er divine powers might also take 
up this path, employing their 
deities’ names to get what they 
and their extraplanar patrons 
want .
    Druids:  Druids  tap  into 
ancient and mysterious pow-
ers of the earth and control 
its beasts . Veiled in super-
stition  and  rumor,  they 
sometimes  use  their  fear-
some  reputations  to  attain 
their  goals .  With  the  ability 
to  turn  into  a  variety  of  crea-
tures,  cunning  druids  could 
be  anywhere,  see  anything, 
and at higher levels, look like 
anyone .  These  talents  might 
allow them to infiltrate a com-
munity and work the will of 
nature  or  their  own  wills 
from within .
 Fig hters:  What  a 
sharp word can’t ac-
complish,  a  sharp 
blade probably can . 
Fighter  scoundrels 
excel at finding the weak-
nesses in their enemies’ defenses, 
using the best fighting ground to 
make  their  stands,  and  setting 
up  ambushes  to  finish  a  battle  as 
swiftly and decisively as possible . Out-
side combat, their heavy armor, powerful 
weapons, and fierce reputations lend them 
presence and authority . A fighter scoundrel 
who uses these advantages might get what he wants with-
out even unsheathing his weapon .
 Monks:  Daredevils  of  the  highest  order,  monks 
attempt feats few other mortals would consider . They can 
circumvent barriers and attain their goals by mastering 
little-understood  powers  to  harness  their  minds  and 
bodies in ways others cannot . Some monk scoundrels, 
like fighters, use their reputations or displays of their 
prowess to intimidate, mislead, or simply take what they 
Scoundrels can belong  
to any class
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel

11
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
want . Others seek out ever greater challenges, daring 
death  and  fate  again  and  again  to  hone  their  already 
incredible skills .
 Paladins:  Paladins  make  unlikely  scoundrels,  a 
common perception they can use to their advantage . 
Exploiting an enemy’s assumptions is not inherently 
evil, and the greater good might be best served by turn-
ing an opponent’s weakness against him . Like clerics, 
paladins wield the mystery and authority provided by 
their faith, but also bear a heavy load of stereotype and 
assumption . By acting the expected role, then shedding 
that façade when it suits them or their deities, paladins 
can be just as effective scoundrels as members of any 
other class .
 Rangers: Often loners and always deadly, rangers can 
survive in nearly any environment, vanish and reappear 
anywhere,  and  slay  powerful  creatures—sometimes 
with a single blow . Tricky, skilled, knowledgeable, and 
precise, a ranger can guide a person or transport an object 
anywhere, and is just as talented at tracking and slaying . 
Rangers have little problem marketing their skills . They 
can turn their talents and knowledge into gold or anything 
else they might desire . Their intimacy with nature allows 
them to attack as boldly as they like, in acts from roadside 
theft to guerrilla warfare, and then slip back into the  
wilds unscathed .
 Rogues: Jacks-of-all-trades, rogues might be blades-for-
hire, manipulators, deceivers, infiltrators, con artists, or 
nearly any other kind of scoundrel imaginable . With their 
wide variety of skills, natural charm, and seeming sixth 
sense about danger, rogues make natural scoundrels .
 Sorcerers: Sorcerers have strange powers beyond those 
of most mortals . They can use these powers directly, 
or play upon rumors of their superior, otherworldly, 
or monstrous abilities . Sorcerer scoundrels are just as 
likely to manipulate and influence others with their 
reputations and impressive force of personality as with 
their magic .
 Wizards: Like sorcerers, wizards too have influence 
over strange and powerful forces . Such magic can dis-
guise them, sway minds, or level cities . Wizard scoundrels 
might pull off intricate con jobs with the simplest of 
cantrips or use more powerful magic to manipulate the 
world as they desire .
PlaYI  ng a sCoundrel
Although the selfish nature of some makes them dif-
ficult allies, many scoundrels excel when supported by 
talented associates . Knowing that she can do so only 
much alone, a scoundrel who surrounds herself with 
colleagues enjoys increased security, additional contacts 
and resources, and a wider variety of opportunities . 
Although the chance to take advantage of would-be 
comrades is difficult to resist, the long-term benefits 
of such an arrangement hold these impulses in check . 
When working within a party, scoundrels put their sharp 
wits, keen minds, and quickness to work in a number 
of ways .
 Resourcefulness: For  a  scoundrel,  resources  are 
more than just gold pieces and equipment . A fighter’s 
sword prowess, a wizard’s spellcasting, a cleric’s heal-
ing magic, a bard’s ability to win friends—while not 
tangible  goods,  each  of  these  abilities  can  get  the 
scoundrel and her allies what they want . Whenever a 
party member is wounded or otherwise incapacitated, 
those resources are lost to the party . Despite scoundrels’ 
materialistic tendencies, their success depends on the 
well-being of their allies, giving even the most self-
centered cads a prime reason to exploit their associates 
as little as possible .
  Scoundrels are also masters of finding resources on the 
fly  . Imagination can prove more valuable than an army, 
turning a chandelier into a weapon, a curtain into a rope, 
and a boat into a battering ram .
  Scoundrels overcome obstacles by expending the fewest 
of their own and the party’s resources possible . They might 
steal needed items or coax information out of an infor-
mant rather than paying for those goods . Sneaking past a 
guard or charming a monster means that valuable spells 
don’t need to be cast and no one risks bodily harm . Such 
ploys might not always be the easiest way, but weighing 
chances of success and choosing one danger over another 
are gambles and educated guesses that keep a scoundrel’s 
life exciting .
 Exploiting Weakness: In addition to the resources 
a  scoundrel  and  his  allies  possess,  an  opponent’s 
hindrances or deficiencies can also be put to use . A 
scoundrel seeks to learn about his enemies and find out 
what weapons, tactics, and tricks he might use to his 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
oT  her Classes
A number of character classes from other D&D supplements 
make  excellent  choices  for  scoundrels,  and  some  of  these 
classes are mentioned often in these pages. The following are 
the most common of these classes and the books in which 
they appear.
	   Hexblade:	Complete Warrior 5.
 Lurk:	Complete Psionic 13.
 Ninja:	Complete Adventurer 5.
 Psion:	Expanded Psionics Handbook 19.
 Psychic	Warrior:	Expanded Psionics Handbook 24.
 Scout:	Complete Adventurer 10.
 Spellthief:	Complete Adventurer 13.
 Swashbuckler:	Complete Warrior 11.
 Warlock:	Complete Arcane 5.
 Wilder: Expanded Psionics Handbook 29.

12
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
advantage . This research might be as simple as making 
a few Knowledge checks to reveal a monster’s vulner-
abilities, or taking the time to perform reconnaissance 
on enemy headquarters or to discover an opponent’s fears 
and blind spots .
  Part of exploiting an enemy’s weaknesses is preparation . 
Whether a scoundrel is fighting monsters of the frozen 
waste, traveling through the mountains, or dealing with 
a local bandit lord, a certain amount of forethought helps 
him make the right choice: a flaming weapon, climbing 
equipment, or an irresistible bribe .
 Improvisation: When a scoundrel can’t prepare, she 
improvises . A scoundrel deals with or extracts herself 
from a perilous situation by falling back on her instincts 
and what she knows best . Trusting in experience and 
skill, a scoundrel rolls with the punches, seeking to 
salvage what she can from a bad situation while suffer-
ing the least physical injury and losing as few resources 
as possible .
 Alertness: A scoundrel’s watchfulness and quick wit 
helps her take the greatest advantage of every situation . 
Not every obstacle is as obvious as a locked door or an 
openly hostile opponent . By staying alert, a scoundrel 
can deal with hidden traps or enemies on her own terms . 
This trait makes scoundrels seem overly suspicious—and 
perhaps some are—but most are merely considering how 
to exploit any situation, and they refuse to ignore their 
enemies’ potential to do the same . On those occasions 
when a scoundrel is caught unawares, beating a hasty 
retreat allows her to learn from her mistake, decreases the 
amount of resources spent haphazardly, and improves her 
chances of success on her next attempt .
  Just as a scoundrel’s alertness keeps her wary of threats, 
it also makes her vigilant for opportunities that others 
would pass by . Within the depths of some gods-forsaken 
dungeon, this might mean casting spells and keeping an 
eye out for secret doors, concealed treasure, or items with 
hidden value . In society, maximizing opportunities might 
mean finding the highest-paying buyers, acquiring con-
tacts with lucrative assignments, or cozying up to people 
in a position of influence .
  Even in battle, a scoundrel is skilled at finding ways to 
maximize benefits for herself and her party . Whether this 
means casting helpful spells on allies, moving to flank a 
friend’s opponent, employing bardic music, using the aid 
another action or special attacks such as disarm or trip, 
the scoundrel knows what her skills are and defers to the 
specialties of her allies when doing so means surviving 
or finishing a job as efficiently as possible .
MakIng a sCoundrel
Not every scoundrel wears leather armor and conceals a 
dagger beneath a black silken cloak . Scoundrels come in 
all shapes and sizes, and they draw their strength from a 
variety of sources both mundane and magical .
  This section discusses how to create a scoundrel character 
regardless of the abilities she wields . Whether stealthy or 
brash, nimble or clever, magical or psionic, your would-be 
scoundrel can glean useful advice from the entries below . 
These discussions include references to the new skill 
tricks rules presented in Chapter 3, as well as to other 
D&D supplements for those readers who have assembled 
a library of resources .
aC  robaTIC sCoundrel
Flashy and flexible, the acrobatic scoundrel performs 
agile acts that leave her victims and other witnesses 
in awe .
 Personality: The acrobatic scoundrel craves attention . 
You despise performing away from an audience—even if 
your “performance” includes theft . You put forth a persona 
for others to admire or hate, but you might lead a mundane 
life in your downtime .
 Strengths: Agility and athletic talent mark the acrobatic 
scoundrel . Where others see insurmountable obstacles or 
terrain difficult to navigate, you see opportunities . Acro-
batic scoundrels should have high modifiers in Balance, 
Climb, Jump, and Tumble .
 Weaknesses: Acrobatic scoundrels typically lack the 
larcenous talents of the burglar and the smooth tongue of 
the con artist . While able to go just about anywhere, you 
might not be able to finish your task with the same level of 
grace and sophistication as you demonstrated in reaching 
your target .
 Best Classes: The best classes for an acrobatic scoundrel 
are those known for their movement skills . Monks, ninjas, 
rogues, and swashbucklers make up the vast majority of 
acrobatic scoundrels . Rogues have the skill points to let 
you maximize all your favorite athletic stunts and still 
pick up a few larcenous abilities on the side . Monks and 
ninjas make good acrobatic scoundrels because they have 
a number of movement-related class features . High-level 
swashbucklers gain the acrobatic skill mastery class fea-
ture, making them excellent tumblers and jumpers even 
in the heat of battle .
 Best Skills: Movement-based skills make up the core 
repertoire of the acrobatic scoundrel . Balance, Climb, 
Escape Artist, and especially Jump and Tumble should 
stay at the top of your skill priorities . They allow you 
to  infiltrate  secure  locations  and  evade  determined 
guards, all the while impressing witnesses with your 
grace and agility .
 Best  Skill  Tricks: The acrobatic scoundrel gains the 
most benefit from movement tricks (page 82) .
 Acrobatic Backstab: This trick can help you render an 
opponent flat-footed . Plus, the trick’s name fits in with 
the character’s flavor .
 Corner Perch: Get away from your enemies and amaze 
them at the same time . This trick is useful for gaining 
the higher ground bonus or darting out of reach to drink 
a potion .

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
 Extreme Leap: Combine this trick with the great leap of 
a ninja or fast movement of a monk to jump anywhere you 
need to go . Adding the Leap of the Heavens feat (Player’s 
Handbook II) makes it even better .
 Leaping  Climber  and Wall  Jumper: Don’t bother with 
climbing that wall—jump up it! And then drop back down 
again to truly surprise your enemies .
 Slipping Past: Get to where you need to go without wor-
rying about cramped quarters .
 Best  Feats: These feats are optimal choices for the 
acrobatic scoundrel .
 Ascetic Rogue (Complete Adventurer) and Ascetic Stalker 
(page 73): Each of these feats allows you to combine 
the monk’s martial prowess with the rogue’s or ninja’s 
stealth .
 Combat Acrobat (PH II): You don’t want to stumble around 
and look foolish . The feat’s name plays right into your 
scoundrel’s archetype as well .
 Dodge: While useful in its own right, this feat’s true 
value lies in the other options it opens up (Mobility 
and Spring Attack) . For acrobatic scoundrels with a 
high speed, consider Expeditious Dodge (Races of the 
Wild) instead .
   Freerunner (page 77): This handy feat lets you add more 
movement tricks to your repertoire .
 Leap of the Heavens (PH II): Next to Tumble, Jump is your 
most important skill . Make it look easy .
 Lucky Catch (page 79): Just in case that key Jump check 
fails by 5 or more .
 Best  Multiclass  Combination: Regardless of your 
main class, a level or two of bard doesn’t hurt, and it can 
help a lot . Not only do bards have a high number of skill 
points, but all the important acrobatic skills are class 
skills for them . The real advantage of two bard levels 
comes from their spell selection . Expeditious retreat and 
feather fall in particular can keep you alive and help you 
shine on the battlefield .
 Best Prestige Classes: As its name implies, the thief-
acrobat from Complete Adventurer fits in perfectly with the 
acrobatic scoundrel archetype . Another excellent choice 
is Complete Warrior’s dervish, which grants fast move-
ment and the extremely useful ability to take 10 on Jump 
and Tumble checks . A quirkier choice is the exemplar 
(Complete Adventurer), which puts a heavy emphasis on  
skill use .
aggressIve sCoundrel
Thug, brigand, ruffian . Unlike other scoundrels, the 
aggressive scoundrel lacks subtlety and patience . Fore-
thought and planning to him consist of deciding which 
weapons to bring .
 Personality: You don’t usually talk much, and when you 
do you are direct and to the point . You never sugar-coat 
anything and are typically driven by greed . You take pride 
in your work and the condition of your gear—especially 
your weapons .
 Strengths: You typically have the highest Strength of all 
the scoundrel archetypes and rely on your combat prowess 
to make yourself useful . Don’t skimp on Charisma, since 
a high score helps your Intimidate checks .
 Weaknesses: Unsubtle, short-tempered, and often 
carrying a chip on your shoulder, you look for reasons 
to fight . Even though you’re good at combat, your desire 
to enter it at every turn can cause headaches for your 
companions .
 Best Classes: Any class with the fighter’s base attack 
progression works well for an aggressive scoundrel, but 
some are better than others . The barbarian, fighter, and 
hexblade all make excellent choices, particularly the 
fighter .  Multiclassing  between  those  three  classes  also 
makes for a strong representative of the archetype .
 Best Skills: You likely don’t have many skill points to 
spend, since combat is your primary focus . Intimidate 
is the classic aggressive scoundrel skill; invest in it first . 
Your other skill choices likely depend on your class . Bluff, 
Climb, Jump, Listen, and Spot are all good options .
 Best Skill Tricks: An aggressive scoundrel doesn’t have 
many skill points to spend on tricks, but here are a few 
useful options .
 Never Outnumbered: Use this trick to set your enemies 
back on their heels .
 Speedy  Ascent: Coupled  with  either  a  good  Climb 
modifier or a high speed, this gets you up and over a 
wall quickly .
 Twisted  Charge: This trick is great for surprising foes 
with a well-timed charge .
 Best  Feats:  More  than  any  other  archetype,  the 
aggressive scoundrel relies on fighting ability . Levels 
in fighter bolster your repertoire of combat feats . The 
feats you choose define your fighting style . Those men-
tioned here are optimal choices for the melee-fighting 
aggressive scoundrel .
 Eyes in the Back of Your Head (Complete Warrior): You want 
to be the flanker, not the flanked .
 Improved  Toughness (Complete  Warrior): This feat isn’t 
fancy, but if you take even a single level of a class with 
a Hit Die smaller than d10, you need to increase your 
survivability . If you plan on being near the front lines, 
you need all the hit points you can get .
 Spring Attack: For the aggressive scoundrel on the go, 
no feat is better than this . Wear down a heavily armed 
and armored foe with hit-and-run tactics . Of course, the 
prerequisite feats for Spring Attack are vital as well .
 Staggering Strike (Complete Adventurer): Though this feat’s 
prerequisite requires you to multiclass so you can gain 
sneak attack, the effect is worth it .
 Weapon Focus: This feat is an all-around solid choice for 
any aggressive scoundrel, particularly if you multiclass 
as a rogue or other class without a fighter’s base attack 
bonus progression .
 Best  Multiclass  Combination: A  single  level  of 
rogue or scout is an excellent option for the aggressive 

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
scoundrel, particularly if taken at 1st level for the big boost 
in skill points . The extra damage edge from sneak attack or 
skirmish fits in perfectly with the class’s strengths . While 
2nd level in either class isn’t terribly exciting, reaching 3rd 
level can be worth the effort .
 Best Prestige Classes: Prestige classes designed to 
appeal to fighters work well for aggressive scoundrels . 
The avenging executioner (page 24) offers one way of 
looking at the aggressive scoundrel, while the night-
song enforcer and the streetfighter (both from Complete 
Adventurer) are two more prototypical versions of this 
character .  The  outcast  champion  and  the  menacing 
brute (both from Races of Destiny) present two racially 
oriented  aggressive  scoundrels .  The  exotic  weapon 
master (Complete  Warrior) can intimidate foes purely 
with martial talent .
 Variant Options: See the gray guard prestige class (page 
40) for guidelines on how to use paladins as aggressive 
scoundrels .
ar  Cane sCoundrel
Arcane  scoundrels  rely  almost  completely  on  their 
spells . The cleverest find creative uses for their familiars 
as well .
 Personality: Arcane scoundrels are often seen as lazy 
and suspicious, and sometimes as effete or cowardly . You 
avoid getting your hands dirty, literally and figuratively . 
Your spells allow you to distance yourself from your illicit 
acts    . You see nonspellcasters as weak pawns or effective 
patsies, but when they turn against you, you might become 
a simpering sycophant .
 Strengths: The arcane scoundrel is one of the most 
flexible  character  archetypes .  You  can  hide  behind 
illusions,  use  divination  to  see  what  others  cannot, 
alter yourself with transmutation to bypass obstacles, 
teleport into restricted areas, and perform other simple 
and powerful tasks beyond the abilities of your mun-
dane associates .
 Weaknesses: While powerful and adaptable, you lack 
nonmagical skills and abilities when magic fails . With 
a low number of skill points, few other class features, 
and physical frailty, you lose most of your effectiveness 
when you run out of spells—or worse, are somehow 
denied them .
 Best Classes: The beguiler (from PH II) is the ultimate 
arcane scoundrel, with much of the bard’s spell selec-
tion but vastly increased versatility . The spellthief also 
combines arcane spellcasting with significant talents at 
stealth . Despite their lack of skill points, both wizards 
and sorcerers can make good arcane scoundrels; as the 
former, you have the freedom to fine-tune your daily 
spell selection to fit your immediate needs, while as the 
latter you enjoy a high Charisma score to complement 
misdirection skills .
 Best Skills: Your first few skill points in each level 
typically go toward Concentration, Knowledge (arcana), 
and  Spellcraft,  since  they  form  the  backbone  of  an 
arcanist’s knowledge . After that, spend your skill points 
to bolster any skills that you can’t replicate with your 
spells,  from  Hide  and  Move  Silently  to  Search  and 
Disable Device .
 Best Skill Tricks: A few skill tricks are particularly 
appropriate for the arcane scoundrel .
 Collector of Stories: What spellcaster wouldn’t appreciate 
knowing enemies’ weak points?
 Conceal  Spellcasting: This trick is useful for hiding 
the sleep spell you’re casting while standing in front of 
the guards .
 False Theurgy: This can’t be beat for avoiding enemy 
counterspells .
 Magical Appraisal: As long as you’re stealing the warlord’s 
prized magical treasures, you might as well know what 
they do .
 Best Feats: The following feats are optimal choices for 
the arcane scoundrel .
 Insightful (Complete Arcane): The read magic spell-like 
ability might not add much to an arcane scoundrel, but 
detect magic is handy and detect secret doors is one of the 
archetype’s more important spells .
 Point Blank Shot: This feat and those that build on it 
are valuable to spellcasters who need to kill or disable 
opponents quickly, whether by bow or by ray .
 Silent Spell and Still Spell: Cast your spells without others 
knowing it . These feats, especially Silent Spell, are vitally 
important when you are using your magic to sneak around . 
Their sudden equivalents in the Complete Arcane supple-
ment are just as useful (especially Sudden Silent) .
 Spell Hand (Complete Arcane): Mage hand and open/close 
are by far the most important 0-level spells for an arcane 
scoundrel . The addition of Tenser’s floating disk is icing on 
the cake .
 Best Spells: As an arcane spellcaster, you rely so heav-
ily on spells that just deciding which ones to prepare or 
learn can be a daunting task . Because you use spells (a 
limited resource) in place of repeatable skill checks, you 
must be sure of the precious few you can cast each day . 
Learning or preparing the following spells will give you 
a well-rounded and solid arsenal to choose from . Keep 
in  mind  that  your  class  choice  might  prohibit  some 
options . All spells appear in the Player’s Handbook unless 
otherwise noted .
   0—mage hand: Useful for plucking desired items away 
from elaborately trapped displays or for “grabbing” objects 
you wouldn’t want to actually touch . The open/close spell 
is only slightly less useful .
   1st—sleep: Especially good at lower levels when you have 
no alternatives, sleep lets you slip past guards unnoticed . 
Better yet, if you are discovered and a mass of opponents 
blocks your escape, this spell can open up a route to 
freedom .
   2nd—knock: This is an immensely valuable spell for 
infiltration early in the arcane scoundrel’s career . If you 

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
have enough skill points to master Open Lock, though, 
choose invisibility instead .
   3rd—gaseous form: Good for infiltration, escape, and 
stealth, this spell lets you perform the important activities 
of a dungeon-exploring scoundrel .
   4th—dimension door: This is the ultimate entry and 
escape spell . Unlike teleport, you can use it safely even 
when in a place for the first time .
   5th—dominate  person: No need to kill or even trick a 
guard when you can simply tell him what to do .
   6th—antimagic field: This spell is the easiest way to 
negate a magic trap and render other magical defenses 
useless .
   7th—teleport object: Reaching the treasure is the easy part . 
Getting out with the treasure is more difficult . Use this 
spell to send it somewhere secure (or at least remote) .
   8th—ghostform (Complete Arcane): Gain all the advan-
tages of being incorporeal to scout or launch devastating 
surprise attacks .
   9th—wish: If you want to do it, do it!
 Best Invocations: Not all arcane scoundrels prepare 
their spells from spellbooks or are the descendants of 
dragons . Some make pacts with demons to gain their spells 
and abilities . The following invocations are particularly 
useful for arcane scoundrel warlocks .
 Least—spiderwalk: Especially before anyone else in 
your party can cast f ly, this invocation is the surest and 
best way to reach places whose main defense is difficult 
access .
 Lesser—f lee the scene: Make your escape and leave a 
distraction . Perfect when events don’t go as planned .
 Greater—enervating shadow: Ready yourself to ambush 
someone and punish the curious who come too close . 
This invocation is particularly useful if you multiclass as 
a rogue or assassin .
 Dark—path of shadow: Yet another evasive invocation, 
this one lets you escape your enemies and also recover 
more quickly from whatever injuries they caused you .
 Best Multiclass Combination: No matter how power-
ful you are, eventually you run out of spells or get into a 
situation in which you can’t use magic . When that happens, 
you need mundane skills to fall back on . Taking a couple of 
levels of rogue gives you much-needed skill points, as well 
as the life-saving evasion class feature . If you specialize in 
rays as your offensive spells, you also enjoy the benefits of 
the rogue’s sneak attack .
 Best  Prestige  Classes: Several good prestige class 
options exist for the arcane scoundrel . From Chapter 2 of 
this book alone you can choose from the magical trickster, 
master of masks, or spellwarp sniper . Other excellent 
choices include the arcane trickster (a superb choice if 
multiclassing as a rogue) and assassin . The fatespinner, 
geometer, and wayfarer guide prestige classes, all from 
Complete Arcane, provide interesting twists on the arcane 
scoundrel archetype, as do the daggerspell mage and 
vigilante from Complete Adventurer.
 Variant Options: The spellthief and hexblade can 
be exciting choices for arcane scoundrels, if only for a 
few levels .
Clever sCoundrel
The clever scoundrel uses personality and wit to gain 
an edge . Often charming and extroverted, she rarely 
reveals her true thoughts or lets anyone get too close to 
her emotionally .
 Personality: You like to hide in the open, conceal-
ing your motives, and more importantly, your abilities 
behind your strong personality . You thrive on personal 
attention but professional anonymity, working hard to 
make others underestimate you . Ultimately, you see a 
job as a game to win, and you bring a stacked deck to 
the table .
 Strengths:  The  clever  scoundrel  often  possesses 
several well-developed aliases . While most clever scoun-
drels rely on their wits alone—putting emphasis on 
skills such as Bluff, Diplomacy, and Disguise—others 
find ways of supplementing their mundane talents with 
supernatural  ones .  Bardic  music  abilities  work  par-
ticularly well, as do enchantment spells and telepathy 
powers .
 Weaknesses: The  clever  scoundrel  works  best 
around others . In isolation, your abilities are far less 
useful . You excel in urban settings, but wilderness adven-
tures are anathema to you, and dungeon delves waste 
your talents .
 Best Classes: Bards, rogues, and swashbucklers make 
the best clever scoundrels . Bards naturally crave the 
spotlight and possess potent people-affecting powers, 
making them the best choice for this type of scoundrel . 
Rogues can learn important social skills and still put 
ranks into others to help them pull off their missions 
when no one is looking . Swashbucklers have fewer skill 
points than bards and rogues, but their personalities, 
social grace, and luck make them the best fighting class 
for the archetype .
 Best  Skills: As a clever scoundrel, you need good 
modifiers in Bluff, Diplomacy, and Disguise to blend in 
at all levels of society . Once you have the confidence of 
your marks, you need Hide and Move Silently to slip away 
unseen and perform your task . When completing the mis-
sion, you need to use skills such as Disable Device, Open 
Lock, and Search . Sleight of Hand lets you sneak useful 
tools past the scrutiny of guards and other guests . Bards 
can get by with fewer distracting skills by relying on their 
bardic music abilities—particularly fascinate, suggestion, 
and mass suggestion.
 Best Skill Tricks: Many skill tricks come in handy for 
the clever scoundrel, and you likely have plenty of skill 
points to spend on them . Interaction tricks are particu-
larly useful .
    Assume Quirk: If you need to pass as a well-known person, 
this trick is key .

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
 Group Fake-Out: You head left; everyone else looks 
right .
 Social  Recovery: This  trick  is 
great for correcting the occa-
sional gaffe .
 Best Feats: These feats are 
optimal choices for the clever 
scoundrel .
 Combat  Expertise:  For  the  high-
Intelligence scoundrel, no combat 
feat is better than this one . The other 
feats that require it are pretty good, 
too   .
 Daring Outlaw (page 76): This 
feat makes mixing rogue and 
swashbuckler  levels  even 
more attractive .
 Disguise  Spell (Complete  Ad-
venturer) or  Nonverbal  Spell 
(Planar  Handbook):  Perfect 
for  bards,  these  feats  let 
you  use  your  spells  with-
out blowing your cover .
 Merciful Strike (page 79): 
Clever scoundrels are confi-
dence tricksters and thieves, 
not murderers . This feat lets 
you eliminate a threat in a 
no nlethal manner .
   Master  Manipulator (PH  II): 
This feat puts two potent inter-
personal weapons in your arsenal .
 Best Spells: As a clever scoundrel, you need 
not rely on spells and often cannot use them 
in the middle of a gathering, but they can 
nonetheless play a vital role in your success . 
Here are a few optimal choices; keep in mind 
that your class choice might prohibit some options . All 
spells appear in the Player’s Handbook unless otherwise 
noted .
   1st—disguise self: This is a natural choice for any clever 
scoundrel attempting to infiltrate a gathering of people 
of a different social rank . The value of the +10 bonus on 
Disguise checks cannot be overstated .
   2nd—eagle’s splendor: The main drawback of this spell 
is its limited duration, which makes it useful mainly for 
those all-important first impressions .
   3rd—glibness: This spell helps you talk your way out of 
or into almost any situation .
   4th—voice  of  the  dragon (Spell  Compendium): The skill 
bonuses and the suggestion effect are incredibly useful .
   5th—mislead: This spell lasts just long enough to get 
you out of a dangerous situation .
   6th—veil: If you can’t go it alone, bring the appropriate 
backup under appropriate cover .
 7th—greater luminous assassin (PH II): 
Though this is a risky spell to cast (you 
can be caught at any time), the as-
sassin  it  creates  is  a  very  potent 
distraction .
    8th—mind blank: While useful 
for you, this spell actually favors 
allies who are less able to bluff 
their way through an evening’s 
social gathering .
    9th—time stop: For those sit-
uations when you just need a 
few seconds to get away .
 Best   Multiclass   Com-
bination:  Because  you  fre-
quently  rely  on  Charisma  to 
overcome obstacles, the sorcer-
er class is a comfortable fit for 
your  abilities .  Being  able  to 
cast charm person a half-dozen 
times  makes  you  the  darling 
of any engagement . In addition 
to your spells, levels of sorcer-
er  grant  you  a  vitally  impor-
tant ally: your familiar, who can 
surreptitiously spy for you while 
you’re busy socializing .
 Best Prestige Classes: You de-
pend on subterfuge and trickery to 
accomplish your goals . Depending on 
the social status you wish to portray 
and the types of missions you under-
take, the cloaked dancer and master of 
masks prestige classes (found in Chapter 
2) make excellent choices . The former allows 
for violent confrontations but requires playing 
the part of a relatively low-status entertainer, 
while the latter grants more options for disguises but 
fewer combat skills . If you prefer a lower profile, the spy-
master prestige class from Complete Adventurer allows you 
to mingle unobtrusively and slip away unnoticed .
dI  vIne sCoundrel
Divine scoundrels fall into two camps: those who worship 
good deities and those who do not . A good-aligned divine 
scoundrel often works for a secret organization affiliated 
with her church’s hierarchy, using her knowledge of the 
underworld to battle the darkest aspects of it . A nongood 
divine scoundrel probably worships a trickster deity or a 
patron of murder, lies, or theft .
 Personality: Regardless of their alignment and who 
they worship, divine scoundrels are quiet, confident 
individuals . If you are good-aligned, you usually hide 
out  in  the  open,  trusting  to  your  station  to  shield 
you from prying eyes . If not, you draw back into the  
Scoundrels are masters  
of persuasion
Illus. by M. Coimbra

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
shadows and become as difficult to locate as any mundane 
scoundrel .
 Strengths: Divine scoundrels have many strengths . 
The  divine  spellcasting  classes  are  powerful  in  their 
own right, giving those who belong to this archetype an 
advantage . In addition, you usually work for organiza-
tions and can tap those groups for support . If you are a 
follower of a good deity, you have near immunity from 
local constabularies based on the good works you and 
your colleagues perform . Who would suspect a cleric of 
Pelor of a crime when a known thief was spotted in the 
same area?
 Weaknesses: The organization that supports you also 
restricts you . You must obey your superiors, both worldly 
and extraplanar . The good divine scoundrel in particular 
faces a challenge, since you are tasked with performing 
deeds that fall outside the purview of your faith . In some 
cases, you must lie, steal, and even kill for the church, all 
of which probably violate your religion’s tenets . This cre-
ates a difficult position for you, one that requires frequent 
atonement.
 Best Classes: Clerics have the greatest flexibility of all 
the divine classes, and they dominate the clergy of every 
religion . They make strong divine scoundrels regardless 
of deity or alignment . The already stealthy ranger also 
makes an excellent choice . Outside city walls, druids are 
the archetype’s most numerous representatives, operat-
ing as sappers, guerrillas, and, most frequently, spies and 
scouts .
 Best  Skills: Like  any  spellcaster,  you  need  a  good 
Concentration  modifier .  Knowledge  (religion)  and 
Spellcraft are also useful . Diplomacy, often a class skill 
for divine classes and almost always useful to a scoundrel, 
is essential . Beyond those, focus on the skills in which 
mundane scoundrels are expert: Hide and Move Silently . 
If you still have skill points left over after that, look into 
other useful skills such as Bluff, Disable Device, Open 
Lock, and Search .
 Best Skill Tricks: If you have a couple of skill points 
to spare, consider one of these tricks .
 Conceal Spellcasting: This trick is even more useful for 
you than for the arcane scoundrel, because it lets you cast 
a spell safely while in combat .
 Swift  Concentration: Concentrate on an ongoing spell 
while firing off another .
 Best  Feats:  These  feats  are  optimal  choices  for  the 
divine scoundrel .
 Combat Casting: The divine spellcasting classes are not 
known for their agility or speed, and thus they often end 
up in the middle of melee combat . Reduce the chances of 
your vital spells being disrupted .
 Companion  Spellbond (PH  II):  If  you  have  an  animal 
companion to serve as a scout or distraction, this feat can 
help you keep it alive or provide it with additional spell 
benefits .
 Hawk’s Vision (Complete Adventurer): Many of the wild 
feats come in handy for a druid; the benefit of improved 
Spot checks is obvious .
 Mobile Spellcasting (Complete Adventurer): This is a great 
feat for giving your divine scoundrel extra mobility .
 Practiced Spellcaster (Complete Divine): A multiclass divine 
scoundrel needs this feat .
 Best  Spells: Divine spellcasters have a surprisingly 
high number of scoundrel-friendly spells to choose from . 
If you have access to it, you should strongly consider the 
Trickery domain . It is by far the most useful for scoun-
drels, and all the spells on its spell list belong in your 
repertoire . Keep in mind that your class choice might 
prohibit some options . All spells appear in the Player’s 
Handbook unless otherwise noted .
   0 —detect poison: Make yourself popular by uncovering 
poison in a noble’s food or drink . Of course, those who 
dwell at the higher ends of society should consider using 
this spell on their own fare as well .
   1st—camouflage (Spell Compendium): Druids and rangers 
can be sneaky, too . This spell lets you infiltrate a location 
with a better than usual chance of being undetected .
   2nd—silence: The essential companion to the arcane 
scoundrel’s invisibility. The only drawback to this spell is 
its area—a guard is likely to notice when surrounded by 
perfect silence .
   3rd—dispel magic: Why bother trying to disarm a magic 
trap  when  you  can  simply  do  away  with  it  safely  and 
permanently?
   4th—discern  lies: When you know someone is lying, 
you can look for ways to manipulate him through his 
falsehoods .
   5th—divine  agility (Spell  Compendium): Make yourself 
or an ally harder to hit and grant a useful feat without 
meeting its prerequisite .
   6th—find the path: An incredibly useful spell even for 
nonscoundrels . If you know where you have to go, this 
shows you the way to get there .
   7th—true seeing: If you’re a druid, by the time you have 
access to this spell you’re going to need it—magically 
concealed  treasure,  invisible  opponents,  and  a  host  of 
other  optical  tricks  await  to  thwart  your  attempts  at 
skulduggery .
   8th—discern location: Why go through all the trouble 
of searching for your target?
    9th—miracle: Especially useful if tomb robbing, trickery, 
and general mischief are parts of your deity’s sphere of 
interest .
 Best  Wild  Shape  Forms: One  of  the  strengths  of 
the druid is the wild shape ability . Some forms you can 
assume are well known as being perfect for combat, but 
as a scoundrel you often need a stealthy form instead . The 
following list covers all the sizes of animals a druid can 
assume . All the animals mentioned here come from the 
Monster Manual.

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
 Tiny—cat:  Although  other  options  give  you  the 
ability to fly, within cities (where most scoundrels ply 
their trade) no animal is as ubiquitous, innocuous, and 
widely permitted as the common house cat . True, a city 
hosts more rats than cats, but people don’t mind having  
cats around.
 Small—eagle: This  animal  form  provides  a  host  of 
benefits: You can become an eagle from the moment you 
can use wild shape; you can fly and fight in this form; and 
eagles live in almost every environment, so you never look 
out of place .
 Medium—riding dog: Most animals of this size stand out 
in the city environment, making their forms useless for 
stealth and reconnaissance . For many of the same reasons 
as the cat, the riding dog makes an excellent choice in 
cities (and not a bad one for the road, either) .
 Large—horse (any): Like the cat and the dog, the horse 
blends into a civilized background . Unlike those animals, 
horses can go everywhere except dungeons . On the road, 
in the wild, and in the city, people expect to see horses 
(although  city-dwellers  might  be  surprised  to  see  one 
bareback, so make sure your friends put a saddle on you) . 
In horse form you can also go into deep cover, allowing 
yourself to be captured and then providing your allies 
with the location of those who rustled you . In a desert 
setting, substitute the camel instead .
 Huge—orca: How does something so big blend in? On 
land, it doesn’t . If you’re near the ocean, though, taking 
the  form  of  an  orca  whale  can  let  you  surreptitiously 
trail a pirate ship or other quarry with little fear of being 
bothered .
 Best  Multiclass  Combination: Rogue, naturally, is 
the best multiclass choice for almost all the scoundrel 
archetypes .  Levels  in  spellthief  give  you  sneak  attack 
(always  useful,  particularly  when  it  can  be  used  from 
a position of surprise) and the ability to steal and cast 
arcane  spells,  further  increasing  your  already  potent 
flexibility .
 Best  Prestige  Classes: The divine scoundrel arche-
type is not as frequently explored as its arcane cousin, 
partially  due  to  the  more  limited  flexibility  of  divine 
characters—only  those  who  venerate  a  trickster  deity 
tend to become scoundrels . Nonetheless, some support 
does exist in prestige classes . The divine prankster (Races 
of Stone) provides one example of how the divine scoundrel 
idea can work . Other examples include the black flame 
zealot, seeker of the Misty Isle, and temple raider of Oli-
dammara from Complete  Divine; the daggerspell shaper 
and shadowbane stalker from Complete  Adventurer; and 
the magical trickster from Chapter 2 of this book .
Ps  IonIC  sC oundrel
The  psionic  scoundrel  uses  the  power  of  his  mind  to 
accomplish his goals . He trusts no one more than himself, 
and nothing more than his own brainpower .
 Personality: You consider yourself to be superior to 
normal folk and expect others to recognize that . After 
all, the mastery of psychic talent isn’t easy, so all that 
hard  work  deserves  a  reward,  whether  voluntarily  or 
involuntarily given . Still, you are more self-reliant than 
other scoundrels .
 Strengths:  As  a  psionic  scoundrel,  your  greatest 
weapon is your mind . Free from the shackles of arcane 
rigmarole or divine laws, you are the ultimate in self-suf-
ficiency and freedom . Your powers of stealth, persuasion, 
and trickery defy understanding by common folk, giving 
you a great edge .
 Weaknesses: Most psionic characters lack skill points 
and the wide array of class skills needed for a fully func-
tional scoundrel . Focus on a few key skills as much as you 
can, and select psionic powers that fill a role similar to 
that of the skills you’re neglecting . For example, Climb, 
Jump,  and  Tumble  are  common  scoundrel  skills,  but 
psionic levitate, dimension swap, skate, and dimension slide 
all accomplish similar effects .
 Best  Classes: Of all the psionic classes, the psion is 
the most common and often most effective scoundrel, 
thanks to the class’s broad range of appropriate powers . 
Telepaths, in particular, make ideal scoundrels . Wilders 
also can be excellent scoundrels, in part because of their 
greater array of skills . The lurk is an obvious strong choice 
as a psionic scoundrel, since the class includes a variety 
of roguelike class features and skills . A psychic warrior 
can be effective as a scoundrel, though the class’s skill 
and power selection isn’t ideal for the role .
  An  ardent  or  a  divine  mind  (Complete  Psionic)  who 
chooses appropriate mantles can also be a good scoundrel . 
Ideal  mantles  for  scoundrels  of  these  classes  include 
Communication, Corruption and Madness, Deception, 
Fate, Freedom, Pain and Suffering, and Time .
 Best  Skills:  Psionic  characters  don’t  derive  their 
scoundrel identity from skills, though most have at 
least one skill that is useful for slipping into or out of 
a tricky situation (such as Climb or Jump) . Max out an 
interaction skill if you can (Diplomacy for ardents, Bluff 
or Intimidate for wilders) . You’ll likely need Concentra-
tion for manifesting powers in combat . Every psion has 
a slightly different array of class skills, but those gained 
by discipline are ideal scoundrel skills and should be 
maxed out if possible .
  The lurk has a class skill list resembling that of the 
rogue but only half as many skill points per level, so you’ll 
have to focus on a subset of skills . If you favor the classic 
scoundrel archetype, you should max out Bluff, Disguise, 
Hide, and Move Silently, but if you prefer serving as the 
party’s eyes and ears, you’ll need a few ranks in Listen and 
Spot as well .
 Best  Skill  Tricks:  Psionic  scoundrels  usually  don’t 
have many skill points to spend on tricks, but if you do, 
consider these .

1
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
 Clever Improviser and Opening Tap: The fewer items you 
carry that look dangerous or suspicious in nature, the 
more innocuous you seem .
 Collector  of  Stories:  Like  a  spellcaster,  you  appreciate 
knowing what powers will or won’t work against your 
enemies .
 Best  Feats:  These  feats  are  optimal  choices  for  the 
psionic scoundrel . All feats appear in Expanded  Psionics 
Handbook unless otherwise noted .
 Delay Power: To avoid enemies tag-
ging  you  as  the  one  messing  with 
their heads, use this metapsionic feat 
to delay the onset of your powers .
 Focused Skill User (Complete Psionic): 
For the psionic scoundrel, this beats 
any normal skill-boosting feat .
 Imprint  Stone:  Every  scoun-
drel  needs  the  ability  to  pull 
a  rabbit  out  of  a  hat .  In  your 
case, replace “hat” with “bag 
of  power  stones”  and  “rab-
bit” with “exactly the right 
power to escape the tight 
spot you’re in right now .”
 Psionic  Meditation: Few 
scoundrels  can  afford 
to sit still for an entire 
round  during  a  fight . 
This  feat  effective-
ly  gives  you  an  extra 
standard action in any 
round  when  you  at-
tempt to focus (or lets 
you try to focus twice 
in the same round) .
 Up  the  Walls:  What 
scoundrel  wouldn’t  take 
the opportunity to flee by 
scampering up a nearby 
wall?
 Best  Powers:  Your 
choice  of  powers  is 
crucial,  since  they 
largely define your capa-
bilities and can’t be changed 
on a whim . Here are a few optimal 
choices; keep in mind that your class choice might pro-
hibit some options . All powers appear in Expanded Psionics 
Handbook unless otherwise noted .
   1st—conceal  thoughts:  Not  only  does  this  power  give 
you or an ally a bonus when making bald-faced lies (a +10 
bonus on Bluff checks against Sense Motive), it also guards 
against anyone trying to read your thoughts magically or 
psionically . (A telepath should select psionic charm for the 
ability to make fast friends .)
   2nd—cloud mind: This power confers most of the good-
ness of invisibility plus a ton of useful extras .
   3rd—time hop: When you’re being chased, disappearing 
from existence for a couple of rounds is nearly as good 
as teleport—plus  this  power  affects  your  enemies,  too! 
(A telepath should select psionic suggestion, which is the 
iconic power for psionic scoundrels .)
    4th—implanted suggestion (Complete Psionic): This power 
is equally great for covering your tracks and for gaining an 
edge before a key encounter . (A telepath should select 
psionic modify memory, since he likely already has 
the psionic suggestion power .)
    5th—anticipatory strike (Complete Psionic): Tim-
ing’s the secret not just to good comedy but also 
to putting one over on your opponent . Taking 
a key action out of turn can swing a battle . (A 
telepath should select mind probe, another 
iconic power for psionic scoundrels .)
    6th—temporal  acceleration: This power 
can let you prepare for an unexpected 
fight or just run away to fight another 
day   . (Psychic warriors should select in-
constant  location from Complete  Psionic 
instead, allowing them to teleport all over 
the battlefield .)
    7th—personal  mind 
blank: The loss of useful 
mind-affecting  bene-
fits from allies is often 
worth the immunity to 
your  enemies’  brain-blast-
ing effects .
    8th—shadow body: Short of telepor-
tation powers, few psionic abilities are 
more effective for sneaking into or 
out of secure locations  .  .  .
    9th—psionic   etherealness: 
 .  .  .    Except  perhaps  for  this 
one, which has the add-
ed benefit of bringing 
along your allies .
      Best Multiclass 
Combination: The 
optimal  multiclass 
combination for a psionic 
scoundrel  depends  largely  on  the  key 
ability score for your psionic powers .
  Psions rely on Intelligence for bonus power points and 
save DCs, so they tend to have more skill points than they 
can spend on their limited skill selection . Picking up even 
a single level in a class with lots of class skills allows you 
to keep the ranks of one or two of those skills unusually 
high    . Rogue is usually the best option, though if you want 
to use your high Intelligence to become the party expert, 
bard gives access to all Knowledge skills .
Two psionic scoundrels
Illus. by K. Yanner

20
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
  For a psychic warrior, ardent, or divine mind, two levels 
of ninja provide a good array of stealth-based skills, the 
ability to turn invisible, and the ability to add your bonus 
from Wisdom (likely one of your higher ability scores) 
to AC .
  As Charisma-based manifesters, the wilder and the lurk 
benefit from picking up a level in a class with Charisma-
based skills; either rogue or bard is a good choice . The 
spellthief is another interesting option, particularly if 
you also select the Psithief feat (page 80) .
 Best  Prestige  Classes: The shadowmind (Complete 
Adventurer) is ideal for the psionic scoundrel focusing 
on stealth . The ebon saint (Complete Psionic) fits well for a 
scoundrel willing to dedicate himself to a cause . Psionic 
scoundrels with no regard for personal freedoms find the 
thrallherd (Expanded Psionic Handbook) ideal, though such 
characters might drift over time from being scoundrels 
to near-warlords .
 Variant Options: Though most consider the soulknife 
a psionic character, the class actually has very little in 
common with others of that ilk . A soulknife scoundrel 
functions  best  either  as  an  acrobatic,  swashbuckling 
rascal—with ranks in Climb, Jump, and Tumble and feats 
to match—or as a master of stealth, focusing on Hide, 
Listen, Move Silently, and Spot . See the acrobatic and 
stealthy scoundrel archetypes in this chapter for more 
advice .
rI  ngMas  Ter
The ringmaster forms a menagerie of useful and helpful 
animals, which she uses as spies, scouts, thieves, and—in 
extreme cases—murderers . She trusts their ubiquitous 
and nonthreatening presence to put them into places 
she cannot reach . Taken to the extreme, the ringmaster 
cares little for her fellow humanoids .
 Personality:  Often  an  extreme  introvert,  you  find 
better companionship and more meaningful relationships 
with animals than with people . You can dispassionately 
watch a fellow humanoid writhe in pain before finally 
dying, but you rage and weep when seeing the smallest 
wound on an animal . Not all ringmasters are so antisocial, 
but all share at least a little of this bizarre trait .
 Strengths: As the head of an organization of sorts, you 
place multiple layers of separation between yourself and 
whatever crime or con you devise . Often cunning and 
charismatic (more around animals than people), you are a 
strong planner and a loyal friend . Because of your menag-
erie, you can perform (or rather, orchestrate) a number of 
different tasks simultaneously . Your wide network gives 
you dozens, if not hundreds, of informants .
 Weaknesses: Alone, a ringmaster is weak . You can do 
very little when separated from your animal servitors .
 Best  Classes: Those classes with abilities aimed at 
animals,  such  as  druids  and  rangers,  make  the  best 
ringmasters . The druid’s animal companion is tougher 
than a ranger’s, and druids have more access to animal-
affecting spells, although the ranger has a wider choice 
of skills .
 Best  Skills: Handle Animal and Ride are, not sur-
prisingly, the best skills for a ringmaster . You should 
maintain them at the maximum ranks possible, even if 
you multiclass . Of only slightly less importance, Knowl-
edge (nature) allows you to identify new animals and to 
discern which kinds might be common (and therefore 
unobtrusive) in any given setting .
 Best Skill Tricks: Most skill tricks don’t apply to your 
area of expertise, but a few can come in handy .
 Clarity of Vision: This trick lets you pinpoint invisible 
enemies, saving your animal friends the actions needed 
to track them down .
 Dismount Attack: If you ride a mount, this trick lets you 
deliver a potent charge .
 Healing  Hands:  Sometimes  you’ll  want  to  save  your 
precious cure wounds spells for more important tasks .
 Best  Feats:  These  feats  are  optimal  choices  for  a 
ringmaster .
 Augment Summoning: When you summon a menagerie 
of helpers, they should be the best .
 Companion Spellbond (PH II): Keep your animal com-
panion alive and bolster it with spells that improve its 
survivability and help it avoid detection .
 Natural Bond (Complete Adventurer): This feat is espe-
cially important for rangers or multiclass ringmasters, 
because it gives you the most powerful animal companion 
possible .
 Best Spells: Ringmasters are druids or rangers (pos-
sibly multiclass), or at least have some connection with 
nature through a class or prestige class feature . All the 
summon  nature’s  ally  spells  are  automatically  recom-
mended . In addition to those nine, the following spells 
are particularly useful and important . Keep in mind that 
your class choice might prohibit some options . All spells 
appear in the Player’s Handbook unless otherwise noted .
   0 —naturewatch (Complete Divine): As a ringmaster, you 
are always concerned about the welfare of your animals, 
and this spell lets you know in a moment the condition 
of each .
    1st—speak with animals: This is the core spell of the ring-
master archetype . Use it to instruct your menagerie .
   2nd—reduce animal: This spell increases your options 
on a vast scale . You can sneak an animal into a secure 
location, bring along a trusted companion too large 
to otherwise fit (such as a horse in a dungeon), send a 
Tiny scout into a place too small for it to fit normally, 
and so on .
   3rd—dominate animal: Sometimes you need an animal 
to perform an action exactly, with no mistakes . When 
communicating simple concepts fails, this spell succeeds . 

21
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
It’s also handy for eliminating a hostile animal without 
hurting it .
   4th—giant vermin: Not all the members of your menag-
erie need be animals . Carry a jar of spiders and use this 
spell to make them into terrifying combatants .
   5th—animal growth: The only thing more frightening 
than an angry tiger is an enlarged angry tiger .
   6th—mass bear’s endurance: Keep your menagerie alive 
in a fight . If you’re concerned more with offense than 
survival, try mass bull’s strength instead .
   7th—animate  plants:  Supplement  your  collection  of 
loyal fauna with equally loyal flora .
   8th—mass awaken (Complete Divine): The ringmaster’s 
ideal spell, use this to surround yourself with a group of 
friendly animals smart enough to speak with you .
   9th—shapechange: Beyond the wild shape class feature, 
this spell lets you take the form of any animal, from the 
smallest shrew to the biggest whale . You can also take 
on dire forms of animals .
 Best Wild Shape Forms: Ringmasters are druids, or 
at least take enough levels of druid to gain wild shape . If 
you wish to be stealthy, the animals mentioned for the 
divine scoundrel (page 16) make the best choices . In a 
fight, though, you need something different .
 Tiny—viper: If all the other combatants are Tiny or 
smaller, and the situation makes larger forms difficult 
to use, you can’t go far wrong with the Tiny viper’s high 
attack bonus and poison .
 Small—eagle: The badger is a tough fighter, but you 
can’t overlook the huge advantage of flight . The eagle is 
a good choice if the situation precludes using a bigger 
creature .
 Medium—wolverine: The wolf is popular, but the wol-
verine is powerful . Burrow and climb speeds make it hard 
to escape from, and the rage ability makes it frightening 
in combat .
 Large—tiger: You’re a tiger; what else is there to say? 
Pounce and rake are dangerous and sometimes under-
rated abilities .
 Huge—elephant: This is a pretty easy choice, since you 
have few at this size . The Huge viper is tempting for its 
venomous bite, but the elephant has more hit points, is 
faster, and deals more damage (and can trample) .
 Best  Multiclass  Combination:  Levels  in  sorcerer 
(and eventually, mystic theurge) give you access to yet 
another animal (your familiar), the greater variety offered 
in the summon monster spells, and helpful protective and 
offensive magic .
 Best Prestige Classes: The beastmaster is tailor-made 
for this archetype, while the animal lord provides another 
interesting option; both are from Complete Adventurer .
 Variant Options: You can build this archetype with 
the sorcerer or wizard to focus on outsiders and other 
extraplanar creatures rather than animals .
sT  ealThY sC oundrel
The stealthy scoundrel conceals himself in shadows . He 
is quiet, tricky, and resourceful .
 Personality:  Whereas  the  clever  scoundrel  thrives 
on attention, you hide from it . Usually introverted and 
retiring, you let others take the spotlight while you skulk 
about in the resulting shadows . You like to blend in and 
hate drawing attention to yourself .
 Strengths: As a stealthy scoundrel, you work exception-
ally well in small groups, especially with characters who 
can distract foes away from you . Sneak attack and similar 
precision-based attacks make you a force to be reckoned 
with in combat . Outside of battle, trapfinding and trap 
sense let you fill a vital role .
 Weaknesses:  Creatures  with  supernaturally  keen 
senses and those immune to extra damage from sneak 
attacks can render a stealthy scoundrel useless in combat . 
Magic items that further mask your presence or that aid 
in dealing damage help to minimize that vulnerability .
 Best Classes: Ninjas, rogues, and scouts rely on stealth 
and  deliver  powerful  precision-based  attacks,  so  they 
make the best stealthy scoundrels . Of the three, rogue is 
the most popular choice .
 Best  Skills:  Obviously,  a  stealthy  scoundrel  must 
focus on stealth . Hide and Move Silently are your highest 
priority . For those times when stealth fails or when you 
simply need to escape, you should also keep Climb and 
Tumble at or near maximum ranks .
 Best Skill Tricks: Plenty of the skill tricks in Chapter 
3 are of great use to the stealthy scoundrel, and your class 
gives you plenty of skill points to spend on them .
 Point it Out: Honestly, is there anything more frustrating 
than your allies not being able to see what’s right in front 
of their faces?
 Shrouded  Dance: A moment of concealment can spell 
the difference between victory and defeat .
 Timely  Misdirection: A great trick for establishing the 
most effective position against an enemy .
 Best  Feats:  These  feats  are  optimal  choices  for  the 
stealthy scoundrel .
 Improved Diversion (Complete Adventurer): Distract your 
foe long enough for you to flee the scene .
 Lucky Start (page 79): Going first is good . Protect yourself 
from an unlucky initiative check with this handy feat .
 Quick  Reconnoiter (Complete  Adventurer):  Almost  as 
important as staying quiet is the ability to spot guards 
and potential witnesses before they spot you . This feat’s 
initiative check bonus gives you a chance to take out those 
who detect you before they can raise the alarm .
 Silent Spell and Still Spell: If you have spellcasting levels 
or rely on scrolls, you need to avoid drawing undue atten-
tion to yourself .
 Persistent  Attacker (page 80): Once you’ve delivered a 
sneak attack, this feat lets the gift keep on giving . In fact, 

22
Cha  PT  er 1
sC oundrels of
 
all T
YP  es
all the ambush feats introduced in Chapter 3 are excellent 
choices for a stealthy scoundrel .
 Best   Spells: Although  you  rarely  use  spells  to 
accomplish  your  missions,  you  are  as  unpredictable  
as any other scoundrel . A high-level wizard, for example, 
makes  a  formidable  and  nigh  undetectable  stealthy 
scoundrel .
  The following spells, particularly the lower-level ones, 
are vitally important to a spellcasting stealthy scoundrel . 
However, the ability to cast higher-level spells requires a 
substantial commitment to a spellcasting class . Keep in 
mind that your class choice might prohibit some options . 
All spells appear in the Player’s Handbook unless otherwise 
noted .
   0 —ghost  sound:  Do  not  overlook  the  importance  of 
distracting guards with phantom noises .
   1st—expeditious  retreat: You can move only half your 
speed without taking a penalty on Hide and Move Silently 
checks . Why not boost your speed and make that half go 
farther?
   2nd—invisibility: By far the most important spell in a 
stealthy scoundrel’s arsenal, invisibility lets you concen-
trate on moving soundlessly while remaining comfortably 
concealed behind a veil of magic .
   3rd—nondetection: Even the stealthiest scoundrel can 
be spotted with the aid of magic . This spell helps even 
out things a little .
   4th—greater invisibility: If a little invisibility is good, a 
lot is better . Launch those sneak attacks without fear of 
blowing your cover .
   5th—symbol of sleep: If you fear guards discovering that 
you passed by a certain area, ward it with this excellent 
nonlethal deterrent .
   6th—mislead: All the benefits of invisibility plus a built-in 
distraction .
   7th—ethereal jaunt: Walls? What walls? The spell also 
grants the benefit of invisibility .
   8th—greater  celerity (PH  II):  Whether  in  a  desperate 
fight after being caught or attempting a time-consuming 
act when time is running low, greater celerity grants you 
an  immediate  edge .  The  drawback  (being  dazed  for  a 
round) might mean your doom, however, so use this spell 
carefully .
   9th—etherealness: This spell gives the benefit of ethereal 
jaunt, plus it lasts longer and you can bring backup .
 Best Multiclass Combination: Spellcasting classes 
can deliver a vital boost to the capabilities of a stealthy 
scoundrel, and the wizard excels at the role of stealthy 
spellcaster .  The  class’s  main  strength  is  flexibility:  A 
wizard can cast a wider variety of spells than a sorcerer, 
letting  you  adapt  to  rapidly  changing  or  worsening 
conditions . Wizards gain higher-level spells faster than 
sorcerers as well, so if you merely dabble in wizardry, 
you need just three class levels to gain the all-important 
invisibility.
 Best Prestige Classes: Stealth-focused prestige classes 
abound, from the assassin and shadowdancer in the Dun-
geon Master’s Guide to the whisperknife from Races of the 
Wild. Any prestige class that focuses on stealth makes an 
excellent choice; the difficulty lies not in finding an appro-
priate prestige class but in finding the one that does exactly 
what you wish to do . In addition to those above, Complete 
Adventurer provides the daggerspell mage, dungeon delver, 
ghost-faced killer, highland stalker, nightsong enforcer, 
nightsong infiltrator, shadowbane stalker, shadowmind, 
sp ymaster,  and  thief-acrobat .  For  a  slightly  different 
take,  turn  to Complete  Warrior’s  darkwood  stalker  or  
invisible blade .
  The avenging executioner, cloaked dancer, and master of 
masks from Chapter 2 all represent a different take on the 
stealthy scoundrel . Rather than lurking in the shadows, 
these characters specialize in unexpected strikes made 
from behind a carefully crafted veneer .
 Variant Options: Clerics with access to the Trickery 
domain are surprisingly effective stealthy scoundrels .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
fI  ve fea Ts f  or everY sCoundrel
In  addition  to  the  specific  feats  in  this  chapter’s  scoundrel 
archetype  descriptions,  a  few  feats  bear  mention  as  good 
choices for all scoundrels. Regardless of your character’s pre-
dilection, these feats should be on your short list of options.
 Dash (Complete Warrior): Every scoundrel has, at one time 
or  another,  found  himself  5  feet  away  from  his  ideal  spot. 
This feat lets you turn those dreams of perfect position into 
reality.
 Improved	Initiative: Winning initiative is crucial, whether to 
neutralize  an  enemy  before  the  fight  begins  or  to  f lee  safely 
from  an  unwanted  battle.  This  feat  can  make  the  difference 
between a quick victory and an ugly defeat.
 Force	 of  	 Personality  (Complete  Adventurer):  Ironically, 
scoundrels  share  a  weakness  against  enemies  that  mess 
with their heads. If you’re sick of your silver-tongued charmer 
being controlled by the DM, this feat (which lets you add your 
Charisma modifier instead of your Wisdom modifier to saves 
against mind-affecting spells and abilities) might be what you 
need. In the long run, it’s a better option than Iron Will.
 Open	 Minded  (Complete  Adventurer,  Expanded  Psionics 
Handbook):  If  you’re  trying  to  play  a  scoundrel  with  fewer 
than 5 or 6 skill points per level, this feat is incredibly useful. 
Even someone with plenty of skill points can see the value of 
5 more.
 Weapon	Finesse: Scoundrels aren’t the strongest characters 
around,  but  good  Dexterity  scores  are  pretty  common.  This 
feat is an efficient way to boost your melee accuracy.

restige classes offer an excellent way for scoun-
drels to further expand on their myriad abilities 
or to become expert in a particular field . Just as 
characters of all classes can be scoundrels, all can 
benefit from the prestige classes presented in this 
chapter . Some of these classes also draw on two new rule 
sets introduced in Chapter 3: luck feats and skill tricks . 
ChoosIng a  
PresTI  ge Class
Whether  you  are  creating  a  new  character,  advancing 
a  beloved  old  character,  or  designing  an  antagonist  to 
challenge the party, consider the nuances of each prestige 
class in this chapter . Knowing what you want to do with 
your scoundrel can help you choose which prestige class 
to take; the following short descriptions will guide you to 
the proper path .
 Bad  Guys/Good  Guys:  Members  of  these  prestige 
classes are defined first by their alignment or their outlook 
on the world, then by their other abilities . Roleplaying one 
of these characters means putting attitude first .
 Melee: Scoundrels who seek out melee are relatively 
rare, but those who do so often enter these prestige classes, 
which typically offer sneak attacks and similar precision-
based attacks .
 Ranged: The role of ranged attacker is more comfort-
able  for  most  scoundrels,  letting  them  exploit  their 
specialties while reducing the chance of being slaugh-
tered by a burly foe . 
 Magical: Characters entering these prestige classes 
rely  on  magic  (or  psionics)  to  power  their  primary 
abilities, though they might have more mundane class 
features as well .
 Sneaky: Exploiting the quintessential quality of the 
scoundrel, sneaky prestige classes focus on moving 
unseen through enemy territory or making devas-
tating surprise attacks on the heels of a distraction . 
While nearly any scoundrel-oriented prestige class 
is somewhat stealthy, these take the concept to its 
ultimate expression .
 Support: These prestige classes are best at gather-
ing and disseminating information or using their 
abilities to help other characters . Some also have 
strong  combat  abilities  in  their  own  right,  but 
battle is not generally their primary role .
 Tricky: Luck feats and skill tricks let scoundrels 
pull off stunts that other characters can’t hope to 
achieve . The prestige classes in this category use one 
or the other of these new rules subsystems .
2
Illus. by D. Bircham

2