Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
sake of determining what size of hidden space can be built 
within it . In some cases, common sense will override this 
determination: A dagger wielded by a Medium creature, 
for instance, should be considered a Tiny object rather 
than a Medium or Small one .
  A  selection  of  typical  hidden  spaces  is  described 
below . Of course, variations on these themes are pos-
sible . The price given for each one is a rough estimate 
of the cost of incorporating the hidden space into the 
structure of an item, either before or after the item is 
manufactured .
  Opening a hidden space requires a full-round action 
unless otherwise noted .
 False Bottom: The classic hiding spot, a false bottom 
can be added to any container with a hard base, from a 
desk drawer to a chest to a barrel . A false bottom slightly 
reduces the amount of storage space the object otherwise 
would have . Gaining access to a false bottom typically 
requires emptying the container of the rest of its contents 
and locating and triggering a small latch that loosens the 
false bottom and allows it to be opened .
  The maximum size of a false bottom is two sizes smaller 
than the container it is built into .
 Price: 50 gp .
 False Hold: Ships of all sizes and kinds frequently 
contain false holds . Even vessels that conduct otherwise 
lawful and legitimate business might contain hidden 
spaces . 
  The maximum size of a false hold in a ship is two sizes 
smaller than the ship itself . Most ships are Colossal, so 
they can have false holds of up to Huge size . A vessel 
without a hold (such as a rowboat) can have a hidden space 
added, but its maximum size is three sizes smaller than 
the vessel itself .
 Price: 400 gp .
 False  Scabbard  Tip: A scabbard can be fitted with a 
hollow space at its end that extends a few inches beyond 
the tip of the blade it holds . Access to a false scabbard tip 
typically requires depressing a button or a latch to unhook 
the tip from the sheath .
  A  quick-release  mechanism,  allowing  access  to  the 
hidden space with only a move action, can be added to 
any false scabbard tip for an extra 100 gp .
  A scabbard is typically the same size object as the 
weapon it holds, and a false scabbard tip has a capacity 
two size categories smaller than that . A dagger’s scabbard, 
for example, could have a false tip of Fine size, while a 
greatsword’s scabbard could be large enough to hold a 
Tiny object (such as a dagger) .
 Price: 10 gp .
 Hidden  Flap: Packs, sacks, bags, and satchels can 
contain cleverly concealed inner flaps or pockets .
  The maximum size of the space contained beneath a 
hidden flap is two sizes smaller than the container it is 
built into .
 Price: 1 gp    .
 Hollow Book: Another classic hidden space design, a 
hollow book has the covers and spine of a normal tome and 
blends in with other books on a shelf . Its pages, however, 
are glued together and their middles cut out (usually leav-
ing a half-inch border of paper) to form a space . Unlike 
with most other hidden spaces, the maximum size of the 
space contained inside a hollow book is one size smaller 
than the book it is built into, since so much of the book’s 
volume can be used .
 Price: 5 gp    .
 Hollow Boot Heel: A hollow boot heel unscrews from 
a boot like a jar lid to reveal the hidden space inside . 
  The maximum size of the space contained within a 
hollow boot heel is four sizes smaller than the container 
it is built into . For example, boots made for a human (size 
Medium) can have hollow boot heels no larger than Fine 
size   . An exception is that boots made for Small creatures 
can also have Fine-sized hollow heels .
 Price: 20 gp .
 Inside  Pocket: This hidden space is simply an extra 
pocket sewn into the inner lining of a coat, tunic, robe, 
or pair of trousers . An inside pocket generally only holds 
a few sheets of paper, parchment, or similar items, but 
some are made to hold a potion or a dagger . A single piece 
of clothing can have up to two inside pockets . 
  A character with ranks in Sleight of Hand can substitute 
her Sleight of Hand check result for the normal Search 
DC  when concealing objects in an inside pocket . She gains 
a +5 circumstance bonus on such checks .
  The maximum size of the space contained within an 
inside pocket is two sizes smaller than the article of 
clothing it is built into .  For example, a robe made for 
a human (size Medium) can have an inside pocket no 
larger than Tiny . 
 Price: 1 gp    .
 Lead  Lining: In order to thwart the detection of a 
magic item it contains, a hidden space can be lined with 
a thin sheet of lead . Hard-sided objects can have thin lead 
sheets built into their walls, bottoms, and lids . Soft-sided 
objects, such as clothing, have threads of lead sewn into 
them . Either way, lead lining must be included with a 
hidden space when it is created, and cannot be added to 
an item later . Lead lining adds about 10% to the weight of 
an object in which it is incorporated .
 Price: 10 gp .
Table  5–1,  on  the  following  page,  describes  various 
kinds  of  hidden  spaces  and  provides  the  DC of  the 
Search check to determine the existence or presence 
of such a space . This check is a full-round action, and it 
presumes that the searching character is either holding 
the item to be examined (in the case of a hollow boot 
heel, for example) or has unfettered access to the object 
into which the space has been built (for a false bottom 
or a false hold) . By paying double the normal price, you 
can increase the indicated DC by 5; doubling the price 

10 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
again (to four times the normal price) adds another 5, 
to a maximum DC increase of 10 .
  The Craft DC to manufacture a hidden space is equal to 
the Search DC to find it, and requires an appropriate Craft 
skill (such as woodworking for the false bottom of a chest 
or leatherworking for a hollow boot heel) .
  The figures in the Approximate Max Volume column 
are just that—approximations . All of the dimensions of 
a hidden space should be considered shapeable, so that 
(for instance) a Medium space could measure 3 × 1 × 9 
feet and have the same volume as one that measures 3 
feet on a side . Of course, the size and shape of the object 
into which the hidden space is built must also be taken 
into consideration .
  Normally, hidden spaces are designed only to conceal 
objects . Spaces holding living creatures require extra care 
to avoid suffocation . Any such hidden space costs twice as 
much as normal and includes cleverly hidden airways .
Table 5–1: Hidden Spaces
	Search	   Approximate		    Sample
Size	DC	Max	Volume	Hidden	Object
Fine 25 2 × 2 × 2 in. 10 coins, sheet of 
   paper (folded), shuriken
Diminutive 20 6 × 6 × 6 in. Potion, amulet
Tiny 15 1 × 1 × 1 ft. Book, flask of acid, 
   light weapon
Small 15 2 × 2 × 2 ft. One-handed weapon, 
   backpack
Medium 15 3 × 3 × 3 ft. Two-handed weapon, 
   small barrel
Large 15 5 × 5 × 5 ft. Small boat
Huge 15 10 × 10 × 10 ft. Small wagon
sur  PrIse WeaPons
Scoundrels with a need for weaponry adopt the 
tricks  and  techniques  of  hidden  spaces  to  more 
martial pursuits . 
baYoneTs and  
Co  MbIna  TI  on blades
Archers, crossbowmen, and others who rely on ranged 
weapons are at a distinct disadvantage when an 
enemy closes within melee range . In order to 
maximize survivability in such situations, many 
ranged specialists attach blades to their weapons . 
These blades, called bayonets, give ranged weap-
ons melee capability . 
  A bayonet does not interfere with the normal 
functioning of the weapon to which it is fixed, so 
it can remain attached indefinitely . Bayonets act 
in all ways like normal melee weapons, as noted 
in their descriptions, and can be made masterwork 
or magic (separately from any masterwork or magic prop-
erty of the main weapon) . Attaching or removing a bayonet 
requires a move action . Attacking with a bayonet imposes 
a –2 penalty on the attack roll .
 Bow Blade: Some archers add blades to the grips or 
risers of their weapons . Bowyers can craft bows that allow 
such blades to be permanently affixed . Treat a bow blade 
as a punching dagger . 
 Crossbow Bayonet: Bayonets easily fit onto light or 
heavy crossbows, attaching to the stock below where the 
bolt fires . Crossbow bayonets come in two kinds: knife and 
sword . A knife bayonet attached to a crossbow functions as 
a shortspear, while a sword bayonet attached to a crossbow 
is treated as a spear . A crossbow with an attached bayonet 
cannot be thrown as a true spear can be, though it can be 
set against a charge .
  A hand crossbow is too small to accept a bayonet (but 
see hand crossbow blade, below) .
 Hand Crossbow Blade: Adding a short blade to the 
front of a hand crossbow allows you to defend yourself in 
melee combat without having to draw a different weapon . 
The blade functions as a dagger .
Table 5–2: Surprise Weapons
Weapon	Cost	Weight
1
Bow blade 4 gp 1/2 lb.
Crossbow bayonet, knife 2 gp 1 lb.
Crossbow bayonet, sword 4 gp 2 lb.
Hand crossbow blade 4 gp 1/2 lb.
Boot blade 4 gp 1/2 lb.
Elbow blade 4 gp 1 lb.
Knee blade 20 gp 2 lb.
Sleeve blade 4 gp 1 lb.
Instrument blade 10 gp 1/2 lb.
1 Weight figures are for Medium weapons. A Small weapon 
weighs half as much, and a Large weapon weighs twice 
as much.
hIdden blades
Scoundrels generally avoid fair fights . Many hide vari-
ous weapons about their bodies to glean whatever 
advantage they can . 
       A hidden blade is a spring-
loaded blade attached to the 
inside of armor or boots or 
strapped to the 
scoundrel’s 
Bayonets
Illus. by E. Cox

110
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
body . Activating a hidden blade requires a move action . 
Hidden blades can be made masterwork or magic just as 
normal weapons can be . Attacking with a hidden blade 
imposes a –2 penalty on the attack roll .
  Discovering a hidden blade before it has been activated 
requires a DC 15 Search check .
 Boot Blade: The most common hidden blade, a boot 
blade is concealed in the sole of a boot, usually under the 
toes    . The wearer activates the blade by striking a certain 
part of the boot (usually the toe) against the ground, which 
flips the weapon it into position . Treat a boot blade as 
a dagger .
 Elbow Blade: Hidden within bracers or the forearm 
piece of a suit of armor, elbow blades jut out backward 
and lie flat against the back of the bearer’s upper arm . 
Activating an elbow blade usually requires a flick or twist 
of the wrist . Treat an elbow blade as a punching dagger .
 Knee Blade: Held within the greaves of a suit of armor, 
a knee blade extends with a quick upward thrust of the 
knee . The flat of the blade rests against the bearer’s thigh, 
allowing for full range of movement . Treat a knee blade 
as a short sword .
 Sleeve Blade: Strapped to the forearm of its wearer, a 
sleeve blade lies hidden under a long-sleeved shirt or dress . 
Making a quick downward flick with the wrist triggers 
the mechanism, extending the blade beyond the top of 
the wearer’s hand . Treat a sleeve blade as a dagger .
 Instrument Blade: Most stringed or wind instruments 
have a long, narrow section that can conceal a thin blade . 
Releasing a hidden catch allows the blade to spring forth . 
Such a blade functions as a dagger .
  Any stringed instrument whose neck is designed to 
hide a blade includes reinforcing metal bars for added 
support .
alCheMICal ITeMs
Researchers continually conduct experiments in the field 
of alchemy, ranging from wildly inventive gnome think-
tanks to individual wizards locked away in their towers . 
This constant work occasionally produces items useful to 
adventurers and scoundrels alike .
  Costs and Craft (alchemy) check DCs for creating 
these items appear in Table 5–3 . All of these items have a 
negligible weight .
 Clearwater Tablets: These small black pellets smell 
strongly of tar . Dropping a clearwater tablet into a gallon 
of water cleans the water of disease, poison, and other 
befouling toxins . Water so treated has a vaguely tarry 
smell and leaves a slimy black deposit on a surface it 
touches  but  is  safe  to  drink .  Magic  liquids  (such  as 
potions, oils, and magic poisons) are immune to the effect 
of clearwater tablets . Liquids based on oil or alcohol are 
also not affected . 
 Daystrider  Capsule:  This  bright  blue  gelatinous 
ovoid, when swallowed, allows a humanoid creature to 
walk for 10 hours in a day (instead of the normal 8 hours) 
before making a Constitution check to resist damage 
and fatigue . Walking longer than that entails making a 
forced march as normal (PH 164)    . Consuming a second 
daystrider capsule before 24 hours have passed has no 
further effect .
 Ferrous  Aqua:  A  pellet  of  ferrous  aqua  is  a  half-
inch-diameter sphere of glass containing a rusty red 
liquid with small black flakes floating in suspension . 
A ferrous aqua pellet can be thrown as a ranged touch 
attack with a range increment of 5 feet . Alternatively, 
it can be loaded into a sling and used as a sling bullet . 
When it strikes a firm surface, the pellet bursts and 
sprays out the suspension within . Any creature with 
damage reduction that is overcome by cold iron takes 
1d6 points of damage and is sickened for 1 round if 
struck by a ferrous aqua pellet (a successful DC 12 Forti-
tude save negates the sickened condition, but not the 
damage) . Other creatures take no damage from a ferrous 
aqua pellet .
 Forger’s Paper: This normal-looking sheet of paper is 
infused with an alchemical substance that makes the sheet 
nearly transparent for 1 hour when exposed to heat . The 
now-clear sheet can be overlaid on a document to be copied, 
granting a +2 alchemical bonus on Forgery checks made 
while using it . Once the alchemical substance within it 
loses potency, the page becomes indistinguishable from 
a normal piece of paper (and can’t be activated again by 
any means) .
 Endurance Elixir: Imbibing this chalky-tasting green 
liquid instantly acclimates a creature to its surroundings . 
For the next 12 hours, the drinker gains a +4 alchemical 
bonus on all ability checks, skill checks, and saving throws 
made to resist natural environmental extremes, such as 
hot or cold weather (DMG 302)    .
 Liquid Sunlight: Shining with the light of a torch, a 
pellet of liquid sunlight is a half-inch-diameter sphere 
of glass that contains a gold-colored liquid . The pellet 
can be thrown as a ranged attack with a range increment 
of 5 feet . Alternatively, it can be loaded into a sling and 
used as a sling bullet . When it strikes a firm surface, 
it bursts and sprays out the liquid within . The liquid 
continues to glow with the light of a torch for 1 round 
after exposure to the air . Creatures with light sensitiv-
ity are dazzled for 1 round if struck by a liquid sunlight 
pellet . The pellet deals 1d6 points of damage to a vampire, 
vampire spawn, or any other creature similarly harmed 
by daylight .
 Nerv: This is the street name for a substance also known 
as liquid courage, a gold-colored syrup in a clear glass bottle 
painted with interweaving blue and red swirls . Drinking 
a dose of nerv grants the drinker a +2 alchemical bonus 
on saves against fear effects for 1 hour .
 Powdered Silver: This fine silvery dust sparkles when 
held in the light and is contained in a half-inch-diameter 
glass sphere . A powdered silver pellet can be thrown as 

111
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 5 feet . 
Alternatively, it can be loaded into a sling and used as 
a sling bullet . When it strikes a firm surface, the pellet 
bursts and sprays out the powder within . Any creature 
with damage reduction that is overcome by silvered 
weapons takes 1d6 points of damage and is sickened 
for 1 round if hit by a powdered silver pellet (a DC 12 
Fortitude save negates the sickened condition, but not 
the damage) . Other creatures take no damage from a 
powdered silver pellet .
 Rust Cube: Made of rusty iron, rust cubes are sometimes 
disguised as dice . A rust cube can be thrown as a ranged 
attack with a range increment of 5 feet . Alternatively, it can 
be loaded into a sling and used as a sling stone . When it 
strikes a hard surface, the cube shatters into a fine powder 
of rusted iron . An object or creature made of metal that 
is hit by the rust cube immediately takes 1d6 points of 
damage (ignoring hardness), plus an additional 1d6 points 
of damage each round for the next 2 rounds . A creature 
can wipe the dust off with a move action .
 Toxic Tooth: Since the invention of alchemical capsules 
(Complete Adventurer 119), researchers have continued to 
develop ever smaller delivery devices . The current peak of 
achievement comes in the form of the toxic tooth . Made 
to look identical to its wearer’s actual teeth (including the 
addition of plaque, random filth, and gaping cavities if 
necessary), a toxic tooth can hold a single dose of a contact 
or inhaled poison .
  To activate a toxic tooth, the wearer must bite down hard 
enough to crack it, then spit or exhale the poison at an 
adjacent creature . Doing so requires a standard action to 
make a ranged touch attack, but does not provoke attacks 
of opportunity . If the attack hits, the target is exposed 
to the poison and must save normally . Activating a toxic 
tooth also exposes its wearer to the poison .
 Trail  Bar: This tough, 4-inch-long bar of vegetable 
matter provides the equivalent of one day’s worth of 
food    . A creature that has consumed a bar (which takes 
about  10  minutes)  receives  all  the  nutritional  and 
stomach-filling value of a full day’s food—if none of the 
flavor . However, consuming a second trail bar before 
24 hours have passed sickens the creature for 1 hour . 
Rangers and bounty hunters carry trail bars only if going 
into the wilds for long periods of time, and even then 
only reluctantly .
Table 5–3: Alchemical Items
Substance	Craft	(alchemy)	DC	Cost
Clearwater tablet 30 1 gp
Daystrider capsule 15 10 gp
Ferrous aqua 20 20 gp
Forger’s paper 20 10 gp
Endurance elixir 20 25 gp
Liquid light 30 20 gp
Nerv 25 25 gp
Powdered silver 20 20 gp
Rust cube 30 100 gp
Trail bar 20 1 gp
Toxic tooth 25 30 gp
1
1 Plus the cost of the poison inside.
Po Isons
Not every scoundrel who uses poison is an unscrupulous 
murderer, and not every unscrupulous murderer is a 
scoundrel . Regardless of who uses it, poison is invaluable 
for its ability to kill, weaken, or otherwise incapacitate a 
person surreptitiously . 
  Each of the poisons presented below is unusual in some 
fashion, whether it has increased versatility or a special 
effect beyond mere ability damage . Such qualities make 
many of these toxins attractive choices for those who 
would never normally consider such methods, or for 
poisoners with specific agendas .
 Blasphemix: Said to be refined from the spilled 
ichor  of  a  demon,  devil,  or  other  fiend,  blas-
phemix  corrupts  not  only  the  body  but  also 
the soul . Perpetually warm, greasy, and 
possessed  of  a  vile  blackness  that 
seems to writhe of its own accord, 
blasphemix is further profaned 
by  prayers  and  chants  to  dark, 
ancient, and wholly evil powers . 
This liquid foulness impedes the 
power of faith and hinders even 
the most devout cleric’s access to 
his deity . Despite its origin, this 
poison  affects  creatures  of  all 
alignments and faiths .
       If the subject of this poison fails 
the  initial  saving  throw,  its  ability 
to cast divine spells is hindered . For the 
next 10 rounds, the subject must succeed 
Alchemical items provide a variety of benefits
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel

112
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
on a caster level check (DC 15 + spell level) each time it 
attempts to cast a divine spell . Failure means the spell 
is lost and has no effect .
  Regardless of the outcome of the initial save, failing the 
secondary save applies a –1 penalty to the victim’s caster 
level for all divine spells it casts for the next 12 hours . If a 
creature is subjected to another dose of blasphemix before 
the effect of the first dose has run its course, the 
duration of the first dose’s effect ends .
  In  addition  to  a  Craft  (poisonmaking) 
check, creating a dose of blasphemix 
requires a successful DC 15 Knowl-
edge (religion) check .
 Elemental   Rime:  This 
frosty blue liquid is con-
cocted  from  ice  found 
in frozen regions of the 
Elemental Plane of Air 
or Water . No amount of 
heat  can  totally  dispel 
the coldness that ema-
nates  from  elemental 
rime,  which  partially 
freezes those exposed 
to  it .  If  the  subject 
of  the  poison  fails  the 
initial  saving  throw,  in 
addition  to  taking  1d4 
points of initial and second-
ary Dexterity damage, it gains 
vulnerability to fire for 10 rounds .
  In addition to a Craft (poisonmaking) 
check, creating a dose of elemental rime requires a suc-
cessful DC 15 Knowledge (the planes) check .
 Goodbye Kiss: A sweetly flavored tincture distilled 
from many of the same fungi and roots used in making 
the drow’s infamous sleeping poison, this venom is a 
standby of poisoners who don’t want to harm their vic-
tims    . Goodbye kiss is a favorite of lotharios, swindlers, 
and others who want to avoid being followed . It can 
either be added to food (ingested) or used to coat a small 
needle (injury); the save DC is the same regardless of the 
method of application .
  A subject who fails either the initial or the secondary 
save becomes exhausted for 1 hour . Failing both saves 
renders the subject unconscious for 1 hour instead .
 Gorgon’s Hair: This versatile contact poison is named 
for a clever murderer who would coat her long hair in this 
concoction before seducing her victims . Clear and a little 
greasy, this toxin makes surfaces it is applied to look 
slightly wet, shiny, or cosmetically accented . It is unusual 
in that it does not affect those who already have it in 
their system . Thus, many who use gorgon’s 
hair ingest a dose—a mildly unpleasant 
act—before  coating  themselves  with 
the poison . Those who fear being 
attacked  by  gorgon’s  hair 
might also protect them-
selves by consuming the 
poison . 
   Typically,  a  would-
be  poisoner  mixes  a 
dose of gorgon’s hair 
with  a  liquid  and 
drinks  the  concoc-
tion   . After ingesting 
the  toxin,  that  crea-
ture  is  immune  to 
its effect for 24 hours . 
An  immune  creature 
can  safely  apply  a  dose 
of  gorgon’s  hair  to  a  hand 
or  appendage  to  envenom  an 
unarmed  strike  or  natural  attack . 
Only  the  first  successful  attack  is 
affected; all attacks made afterward, even in the same 
round, do not deliver the poison .
    Salvo: The fortuitous creation of a poisoner with little 
skill, salvo is a weapon of the imprecise and desperate . 
The poison is relatively cheap and easy to create, but its 
effect fluctuates wildly from dose to dose .
  Salvo deals 1d4 points of initial and secondary damage 
to a random ability score . Determine the affected ability 
by rolling 1d6 and consulting the following table; roll 
once per dose . The poison’s type and save DC do not 
vary    .
Table 5–4: Poisons
Poison	Type	Craft	(Poison-	Initial	Damage	Secondary	Damage	Price
		making)	DC
Blasphemix Injury DC 22 22 Special* –1 CL (divine spells) 750 gp
Elemental rime Injury DC 16 18 1d4 Dex plus 1d4 Dex 200 gp
   vulnerability to fire
Goodbye kiss Ingested/Injury DC 15 15 Exhaustion* Exhaustion or unconsciousness* 350 gp
Gorgon’s hair Contact DC 16* 18 1d6 Str 1d4 Str 300 gp
Salvo Injury DC 15 12 1d4 ability* 1d4 ability* 100 gp
Siren’s breath Inhaled DC 18 16 Special* Special* 300 gp
Slow death Injury DC 14 19 1d6 hp/round* n/a 250 gp
Zealot’s blade Injury DC 14* 19 1d4 Con 1d4 Con 350 gp
*See text for details.
Not every poison is lethal
Illus. by E. Cox

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
d6	Ability	Damaged
1 Strength
2 Dexterity
3 Constitution
4 Intelligence
5 Wisdom
6 Charisma
 Siren’s  Breath: This bitter-smelling gas causes the 
subject to become highly susceptible to persuasion . Fail-
ing either the initial or secondary saving throw imposes 
a –5 penalty on Sense Motive checks and on Will saves 
against enchantment spells and effects for 10 rounds . If 
a creature is subjected to another dose of 
siren’s breath before the effect of the 
first dose has run its course, the 
duration of the first dose’s effect 
ends    .
 Slow Death: An insidiously 
persistent  toxin  distilled  in 
part from a dwarven mining 
acid, slow death eats away at its 
victims from within . Unlike 
most  poisons,  which  deal 
damage  in  two  stages,  slow 
death works constantly over 
the course of several rounds .
  A  subject  of  this  poison 
who fails the initial Fortitude 
save takes 1d6 points of dam-
age   . Each round thereafter, at 
the  beginning  of  the  poison-
er’s  turn  (up  to  a  maximum  of 
5 rounds), the subject must repeat 
the saving throw . For each failure, it 
takes another 1d6 points of damage . Once 
a save succeeds, the subject takes no fur-
ther damage . 
 Zealot’s Blade: This venom incorporates the blood 
of its intended target, making it even deadlier to such 
creatures . A tool of hunters and assassins who stalk 
specific targets, each dose of zealot’s blade is brewed 
for a specific type or subtype of creatures . When creat-
ing zealot’s blade, the poisonmaker must choose a type 
(and subtype, if applicable) from Table 3–14: Ranger Fa-
vored Enemies on page 47 of the Player’s Handbook. Any 
creature not of the chosen type or subtype gains a +5 
bonus on saves to resist the poison’s effect .
MagIC ITeMs
Scoundrels rely on a vast array of equipment, some of 
it magical in nature . Because scoundrels come from a 
widely varied backgrounds and possess myriad abilities 
and skills, some can create magic items with useful 
applications . Talented tricksters have even created a 
few  magic  items  that  aren’t  exactly  useful  but  have 
interesting effects . 
asPeCT MIrror
Aspect mirrors allow you to converse with others, face to 
face, at nearly any distance .
 Description: A typical aspect mirror looks like a plain, 
circular, silvered mirror, usually 1-1/2 feet in diameter .
 Activation: As a standard action, you touch an aspect 
mirror and concentrate to activate it . Touching the mir-
ror a second time and willing away the images it displays 
deactivates the item . An aspect  mirror can function for 
as long as a user wishes and regardless of the 
wishes  of  other  bearers  of  mirrors  at-
tuned to it .
    Effect: Aspect  mirrors are  magi-
cal  communication  tools  created 
in groups . An aspect mirror allows 
you  to  see,  hear,  and  speak  as  if 
you were in the same place as an 
attuned aspect mirror (one created 
as part of the same set as the 
one you hold) . While you use 
a mirror, you and your location 
are visible in turn to those near 
the distant aspect  mirror you’re 
communicating with . Thus, two 
distant users can see, hear, and 
speak as if knowingly scrying on 
one another at the same time .
       To  use  an aspect  mirror,  you 
activate both your own and another 
mirror  of  your  choice  (specified 
when  you  activate  your  mirror) .  The 
possessor of the other mirror does not need 
to be present at the mirror’s location, and you 
can scry on its location even without the knowledge of 
the other mirror’s owner . Of course, other users of aspect 
mirrors attuned to your mirror can activate your mirror 
in the same manner . Thus, owners of aspect mirrors often 
keep them covered or in extradimensional containers 
when they are not in use .
  You cannot cast spells through an aspect mirror, although 
you can use a distant mirror to direct the subjects of 
enchantment spells you have already cast .
Aspect mirror
Table 5–5: Magic Items
Item	Cost
Aspect mirror 4,000 gp
Bands of fortune 2,000 gp
Bladeshimmer 750 gp
Lucky charm 7,000 gp
Panic button 750 gp
Rod of ropes 4,000 gp
Shrunken shrieker 500 gp
Trinket of trickery 1,000 gp
Wheel of fortune 6,000 gp
Illus. by H. Lyon

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
 Aspect  mirrors  function  at  any  range  on  the  same 
plane . Two aspect mirrors are commonly created in a set, 
although sets exist with as many as five attuned mirrors . 
Using an aspect mirror does not grant you knowledge of 
all the other mirrors in its set . You can attempt to contact 
only a mirror that you know exists; you must also have 
general knowledge of its location or owner . For example, 
upon activating your aspect mirror, you could attempt to 
reach out to an attuned mirror that you know is held by 
the merchant Fraudis Smerch or the one that you know 
is hanging in the back room of the Friendly Girallon 
tavern .  You  could  not,  however,  attempt  to  activate  a 
fourth mirror in the set whose location and existence 
are unknown to you .
  If all the mirrors attuned to a particular aspect mirror 
are destroyed, the remaining mirror becomes an ordinary 
item of its sort .
 Variants: Some  versions  of aspect  mirrors  project 
an image of the user that appears on the 
mirror’s surface .
 Aura/Caster Level: Moder-
ate divination; CL 10th .
 Construction: Craft 
Wondrous  Item, scrying, 
2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days . 
These  construction 
requirements  apply 
to  a  single  mirror . 
Making other mirrors 
attuned to the first one 
(up  to  a  maximum  of 
four  additional  attuned 
mirrors)  requires  an  addi-
tional expenditure of gp, XP, and 
time, as well as another casting of the 
scrying spell, for each other mirror beyond the 
first one .
 Weight: 10 lb    . (single mirror) .
 Price: 4,000 gp (single mirror) .
bands of for  Tune
These innocuous-looking items allow you to change your 
luck on the battlefield .
 Description: Bands of fortune are gold armbands elab-
orately decorated with glass jewels . They occupy space on 
the body as a pair of bracers .
 Prerequisite: You must have at least one luck feat 
(page 72) or some other source of luck rerolls, such as 
the granted power of the Luck domain, to activate bands 
of fortune .
 Activation: You activate bands of fortune by expending 
one of your luck rerolls as a swift action .
 Effect: You can channel your luck into one of three 
different benefits, each of which lasts for 1 round . You 
can gain the benefit from only one effect at a time . 
•  Attack: You gain a +2 luck bonus on attack and damage 
rolls    .
•  Defend: You gain a +2 luck bonus to Armor Class .
•  Survive: You gain a +2 luck bonus on saving throws .
 Aura/Caster Level: Moderate transmutation; CL 9th .
 Construction: Craft Wondrous Item, any luck feat, 
1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days .
 Weight: — .
 Price: 2,000 gp .
bladeshIMMer
A silvery oil, bladeshimmer causes nonliving objects on 
which it is smeared to turn invisible .
 Description: Most often found in small vials full 
of what looks like quicksilver, bladeshimmer is a thin, 
magical oil . When it is smeared over a weapon or other 
object, the materials making up the object become wholly 
transparent .
 Activation:  You  can  coat  a  weapon  or 
other  object  of  similar  size  with 
bladeshimmer  as  a  full-round 
action .
 Effect: Bladeshimmer 
renders an object invis-
ible   . Anyone holding an 
affected  object  appears 
to  have  an  empty  hand, 
though keen eyes can spot 
something  out  of  place . 
Use the bearer’s Sleight of 
Hand check result (with a 
+10  competence  bonus)  as 
the DC for the observer’s Spot 
check .
  If you attack with a weapon coated with 
bladeshimmer, the target is considered flat-footed 
unless it succeeds on a Spot check to notice something 
unusual . A single successful attack wipes away enough 
bladeshimmer to end the invisibility effect .
       A single vial of this substance can coat an area up to 2 
feet square . It can’t be divided between multiple objects, 
though multiple vials can combine to make a larger ob-
ject invisible . Each doubling of the area to be affected 
requires four times as much bladeshimmer (four vials for 
an area 4 feet square, and so forth) and takes a correspond-
ingly longer time to apply .
 Bladeshimmer  has  no  effect  on  creatures—even  un-
dead and constructs cannot be rendered invisible with 
this substance .
 Aura/Caster Level: Faint illusion; CL 5th .
 Construction: Craft Wondrous Item, invisibility, 375 
gp, 30 XP, 1 day .
 Weight: 1 lb   .
 Price: 750 gp .
Bands of fortune
Illus. by R. Gallegos

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
luCkY CharM
A  lucky  charm  makes  you  more  fortunate  than  you 
already are .
 Description: A thick gold bracelet bearing various 
decorative  solid  gold  figurines  forms  a  set  of lucky 
charms . Each figurine on the bracelet is made in the 
form of a different item or creature, usually something 
considered lucky (such as cats, horseshoes, four-leaf 
clovers, and the like) . A new set of lucky charms has seven 
such figurines . 
  When you activate a lucky charm, the bracelet glows 
briefly with a mild white radiance, and the figurine you 
chose to activate disappears . Once all its charms are used 
up, the gold bracelet becomes a nonmagical item worth 
100 gp .
 Prerequisite: You must have at least one luck feat 
(page 72) or some other source of luck rerolls, such as 
the granted power of the Luck domain, to activate a 
lucky charm .
 Activation: Whenever you would otherwise use a 
luck reroll, you can instead activate a lucky charm . As a 
standard action, while holding the bracelet you vigor-
ously rub one of the charms with your thumb while 
concentrating . 
 Effect: When you activate this item, you use one of the 
charms on the bracelet to gain the benefit of a successful 
luck  reroll  without  expending  one  of  your  daily  luck 
rerolls . You can expend only one charm per round . You 
can use this ability only with luck effects that require 
one luck reroll to activate . Effects that require more than 
one luck reroll cannot be partially paid for by expending 
a charm . 
 Aura/Caster   Level: Moderate  transmutation;  CL 
11th    .
 Construction: Craft Wondrous Item, any three luck 
feats, 3,500 gp, 280 XP, 7 days .
 Weight: — .
 Price: 7,000 gp .
PanIC buTT  on
Taking the shape of various small and innocuous adorn-
ments, panic  buttons  produce  a  wide  range  of  effects 
depending on the specific type . 
 Lore: The first of these items were created by the 
famed assassin Fratello Simm to aid his guildmates in 
avoiding capture . Knowledge of panic buttons began to 
spread when examples of the items were discovered on 
captured assassins’ guild members . Fratello original-
ly created the bolstering, escaping, and flexing panic 
buttons . Since then, a wider assortment of buttons has 
been developed by other sorts of spellcasters .
 Description: As their name implies, panic  buttons 
often look like normal buttons sewn into clothing . They 
might also resemble round metal bells, glass beads, or 
other small, inconspicuous adornments . 
  Regardless of its form, when activated a panic  button 
bursts with a small flash of light, a tiny popping noise, 
and a faint smell of sulfur .
 Activation: You activate a panic button by dropping or 
throwing it onto the ground . These items are designed for 
quick use; you can pull a panic button off your clothing (as 
long as you aren’t wearing armor) and drop it in your square 
as a swift action . You can pull it off your clothing and toss 
it into another square as standard action . A thrown panic 
button has a range increment of 5 feet . Throwing the but-
ton into a square other than your own requires a ranged 
touch attack, as though it were a splash weapon, and it 
lands in a random square if you miss (see PH 158)    . 
 Effect: A panic button affects whatever creature is in 
the square it lands in . Unless otherwise noted, a button’s 
effect lasts for 1 round . If you target another creature’s 
square, that creature is allowed a DC 16 Fortitude save 
to resist the effect created by a panic button . (Most panic 
buttons are harmless effects that creatures would like 
to receive .)
   A number of different kinds of panic buttons exist . The 
following are the most common; each one lists the spell 
needed to create it .
 Bolstering: You gain 10 temporary hit points for 1 round . 
Requires false life .
 Dodging: You gain a +2 dodge bonus to your Armor Class 
against the first attack made against you in the next round . 
Requires haste .
 Escaping: You immediately gain the benefit of dimension 
door, except that the range is limited to 30 feet and you must 
have line of sight to the destination . Requires dimension 
door .
 Flexing: You gain a +5 bonus on all Dexterity-related 
skill checks and Dexterity checks made in the next round . 
Requires cat’s grace .
 Meandering:  You  act  as  if  under  the  effect  of  a slow 
spell for 1 round; this panic button is usually thrown at an 
opponent . Requires slow .
 Protecting: You gain a +2 bonus on the next saving throw 
you roll within 1 round . Requires resistance .
 Retreating: You gain an enhancement bonus of 30 feet 
to your speed for 1 round . Requires expeditious retreat .
 Silencing: You act as if under the effect of a silence 
spell, centered on you, for 1 round . Requires silence .
 Standing: You act as if under the effect of a dimensional 
anchor spell for 1 round; this panic button is usually thrown 
at an opponent . Requires dimensional anchor .
 Strengthening: You gain a +5 bonus on all Strength-related 
skill checks and Strength checks made in the next round . 
Requires bull’s strength .
 Aura/Caster Level: Moderate transmutation; CL 7th .
 Construction: Craft  Wondrous  Item,  spell  varies 
(see individual description), 375 gp, 30 XP, 1 day .
 Weight: — .
 Price: 750 gp .

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
rod of roPes
This versatile item meets your every rope-related need .
 Description: Crafted from the darkest teak and repeat-
edly stained until it holds a lustrous black shine, this rod is 
a sculpted, 18-inch-long baton . Closer inspection (Search 
DC 15) reveals three barely perceptible concave indenta-
tions in the middle third of the rod . 
 Activation: The three indentations act as buttons . 
Pressing any one of the rod’s buttons requires a 
move action . 
 Effect: The rod has three functions, each of 
which can be employed an unlimited number of 
times . However, no two functions can be used at 
the same time
 Rope: When you press button 1, rope begins 
to extrude from one end of the rod at the rate 
of 60 feet per round . The rod can extrude 300 
feet of rope in this manner . Pressing the button 
a second time stops the rope from extruding . 
Pressing it a third time draws the rope back in, 
also at a rate of 60 feet per round . Any knot in 
the rope automatically unties when it comes 
within 30 feet of the rod . This rope has the 
same hardness and hit points as the rest of 
the rod .
 Grappling  Hook  and  Rope: When you press 
button 2, a small leather wrist loop springs 
from  one  end  of  the  rod  and  three  sharp 
grappling hooks sprout from the other end . 
Pressing the button again launches one-third 
of the rod (the end with the three hooks) in the 
direction you aim it . A length of rope up to 300 
feet long trails behind the launched section 
and connects it with the end you hold; all 300 
feet of rope can discharge in 1 round . The rope 
stops unreeling if the hooks strike something 
solid (including a creature) or if you give the 
rod a quick backward jerk . Pressing the button 
a third time retracts the rope, drawing the held 
end toward the hooked end if it is secured prop-
erly   . The retracting feature can pull up to 1,000 
pounds with it, drawing up 60 feet of rope per 
round . The rope has the same hardness and hit 
points as the rest of the rod .
  This function can be used to attack and push back 
opponents within 30 feet (beyond that distance 
it lacks sufficient power) . On a successful 
ranged attack (no range increment) the hooked 
end deals 1d6 points of damage . The force of the blow is 
considerable, and those struck by it are subject to a bull 
rush effect (treat the hooked end as having a +5 bonus 
on its opposed check) . The hooked end cannot pursue a 
pushed opponent .
 Grappling  Hooks  and  Slide: When you press button 3, 
three  sharp  grappling  hooks  sprout  from  each  end  of 
the rod . Pressing the button again launches the two 
ends of the rod (each one-third of its length) in opposite 
directions simultaneously . A length of rope up to 300 feet 
long trails behind each launched section and connects 
it with the middle third you hold (all 600 feet of rope 
can discharge in 1 round) . The grappling hooks work 
exactly as described above, including the possibility of 
bull rushing opponents . Pressing the button a third 
time causes part of the middle section to expand 
slightly in diameter and slide freely along the 
extruded rope . The slide can be released from 
the remaining part of the middle section by 
squeezing it to loosen it . Two hand loops allow 
you to slide down the rope if it is at an angle . 
Regardless of the angle of the rope or the load 
on it (up to 1,000 pounds), if attached firmly 
the rope does not sag .
Pushing any button a second time returns the 
rod to its previous (unactivated) state .
 Aura/Caster Level: Moderate transmuta-
tion; CL 10th .
 Construction: Craft  Rod, animate  rope, 
2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days .
 Weight: 4 lb   .
 Price: 4,000 gp .
shrunken shr  Ieker
This  shrunken  head  can  be  attached  to  any 
weapon, shield, or piece of armor . It lets out a 
scream if anyone but the true owner attempts 
to use the item .
 Lore: Ensorceled by savage adepts, the heads 
of fallen enemies now guard the armaments of 
those who killed them .
 Description:  This  item  is  a  disgusting 
severed head, shrunken to the size of a baby’s 
fist, with its eyes and mouth loosely stitched 
shut    . A clasp in its long, straggly black hair 
allows  the  head  to  be  clamped  or  tied  onto 
other objects . 
 Activation: A shrunken shrieker can be attached 
to any weapon, shield, or piece of armor . Once it is 
so affixed, it considers the attacher to be the item’s 
true owner .
 Effect: A shrunken shrieker dangles qui-
etly from the weapon, shield, or armor it is 
attached to, as long as it considers the user 
to  be  the  item’s  true  owner .  If  any  other  creature  at-
tempts to use the item to which the head is attached, the 
shrunken shrieker’s mouth distends around the stitches, 
letting out a horrible, inhuman screaming . The sound 
of a shrunken shrieker is just as loud as an audible alarm 
created by the alarm spell, and it continues for as long as 
a creature other than the item’s true owner uses the item . 
Illus. by E. Cox
Rod of ropes

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
The head stops screaming as soon as the item it 
is attached to is put down or removed .
  A shrunken shrieker can be ripped off an item 
as a full-round action . If the head has started 
screaming and is torn off an item, it continues 
shrieking wherever it falls until either the 
true owner of the item it was attached to 
touches it or it is destroyed . A shrunken 
shrieker has hardness 2 and 5 hit points .
 Variants: Some shrunken  shriekers are 
said to be crafted from the heads of fiends . 
These  variations scream  so  terribly  that 
they also hinder those who make use of 
the items they guard; a creature other than 
the item’s true owner must make a DC 13 
Will  save  or  be  shaken  for  as  long  as 
the head continues screaming . This is 
a mind-affecting fear ability . Creatures 
that fail this save are vulnerable to 
this shrunken fiendshrieker’s scream-
ing for the next 24 hours, they do 
not receive a new save if they put 
down the affected item and pick it 
back up later . 
 Aura/Caster  Level: Faint  abjuration;  CL 
3rd   .
 Construction: Craft Wondrous Item, alarm, 250 gp, 20 
XP, 1 day .
 Weight: 1/2 lb .
 Price: 500 gp . A shrunken fiendshrieker variant costs an 
extra 1,500 gp, and its XP cost and crafting time increase 
accordingly .
Tr  InkeT of TrIC kerY
A trinket of trickery makes you trickier than you already are .
 Description: Trinkets of trickery can take the form of any 
small baubles, totems, or lucky charms . A popular shape 
is that of a stylized cat sitting on its haunches and waving, 
but many such items resemble chess pieces or figurines of 
mounted knights and dragons . A trinket of trickery is never 
larger than 1 inch in its longest dimension .
 Prerequisite: You must know at least one skill trick to 
use a trinket of trickery .
 Activation: You must wear a trinket of trickery on your 
person for at least 24 hours to attune it to you . After that 
time, the trinket grants its power to you as long it is on 
your person (in a pocket, held on a necklace around the 
neck, attached to a helmet, and so on) . It does not grant its 
power if stored within a backpack, bag of holding, or similar 
location; it must be in close physical contact in some way 
(though it doesn’t take up space on your body) .
 Effect: A trinket of trickery holds the secret knowledge 
of a single skill trick (see page 83 for a list) . You can use 
that trick as if you had spent skill points to learn it, but 
only if you meet the prerequisite for learning the trick .
   You can’t gain the benefit of more than one trinket of 
trickery simultaneously; if you wear a second trinket 
while  one  is  already  on  your  body,  the 
second has no effect .
 Aura/Caster Level: Faint transmutation; 
CL 5th .
 Construction: Craft Wondrous 
Item, knowledge of the trick con-
tained, 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day .
 Weight: — .
 Price: 1,000 gp .
Wheel of for  Tune
This  hand-held  wheel  grants  its 
user a dose of extra fortune . 
 Lore: Clerics  of  Olidammara 
claim the genesis of these items 
lies  with  their  fickle  and  fun-
loving  god,  and  nobody  seems 
intent on arguing the point with 
them . Indeed, the oldest known 
wheels of fortune bear the Laugh-
ing Rogue’s symbol in conspicuous 
locations .
 Description: A wheel of fortune consists of 
a 2-foot-wide wooden box with a brightly painted metal 
wheel, a little larger in diameter than the width of the 
box, partially encased at one end . The wheel is divided 
into eight “slices,” each one corresponding to one of the 
colors of the rainbow, plus a white slice . A brass needle 
sticks out the end of the box at the wheel end and acts as 
a pointer . In the center of the box’s top, lined up perfectly 
with the edge of the wheel, is a raised brass button (which 
sometimes bears the mark of Olidammara) .
  Spinning the wheel causes the color slices to blur into 
a disk of white . Regardless of how tightly a user holds it 
and no matter how hard the wheel is spun, the item never 
wobbles or loses its perfect balance .
 Activation:  Pressing  the  brass  button  (a  standard 
action) activates the wheel, causing it to spin all the way 
around seven times . One round after activation, the wheel 
comes to a stop sometime during its eighth rotation with 
the brass pointer indicating one of the eight slices at 
random . Any attempt to stop the wheel or influence its 
outcome once its button has been pushed not only fails 
but also results in a jolt that deals 1d6 points of electric-
ity damage . A wheel of fortune confers its effect on the 
character holding it .
 Effect: When the wheel stops spinning, you gain an 
effect that depends on the slice the brass pointer indi-
cates . The effect lasts for 24 hours . Once used, a wheel of 
fortune does not function again for the same character 
for 24 hours . 
  Roll on the following table to determine the wheel’s 
effect .
Shrunken shrieker
Illus. by K. Yanner

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
d8	   Color	Effect
1 Red –1 penalty on attacks and saves
2 Orange +2 luck bonus on Str checks and Str- 
  based skill checks
3 Yellow +2 luck bonus on Dex checks and Dex-
  based skill checks
4 Green +2 luck bonus on Con checks and Con-
  based skill checks
5 Blue +2 luck bonus on Int checks and Int-
  based skill checks
6 Indigo +2 luck bonus on Wis checks and Wis-
  based skill checks
7 Violet +2 luck bonus on Cha checks and Cha-
  based skill checks
8 White 10 temporary hit points
 Aura/Caster Level: Moderate transmutation . CL 8th .
 Construction: Craft Wondrous Item, bear’s strength, 
bestow curse, bull’s endurance, cat’s grace, eagle’s splendor, false 
life, fox’s cunning, owl’s wisdom, 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days .
 Weight: 2 lb   .
 Price: 6,000 gp . 
lI  vIng ITeMs
In matters of survival, adventur-
ers can’t limit their resources 
to  the  basic  gear  moldering 
on shop shelves or tended by 
inexperienced commoners . 
The  most  resourceful  and 
imaginative travelers make 
use of what’s available around 
them, wonders of the natural 
world: exploitable creatures 
and oddities of the planes that 
possess fantastic and versatile 
abilities . 
  The following items all are or incorporate forms of life, 
but each creature is simple or docile enough to allow use of 
its special abilities . Some are frail and can survive for only 
a limited amount of time or require some form of tending . 
Otherwise,  each  of  these  living  items  is  a  nonmagical 
form of equipment that an adventurer might use just as 
he uses a manufactured item . Such items might be subject 
to unusual hazards (such as a torch bug’s tube breaking or 
a planar mote escaping and floating away) .
Table 5–6: Living Items
Item	Cost	Weight
Green air bramble   80 gp -—
Gut mites   50 gp 1 lb.
Jabberweed   60 gp 1 lb.
Planar mote 300 gp —
Planar mote, greater 600 gp 1 lb.
Rust monster wand 160 gp 2 lb.
Torch bug paste   25 gp —
Torch bug tube   30 gp 1 lb.
green aIr bra  Mble
A creeping vine cultivated by many traveling druids and 
clerics of nature-loving deities, this fast-growing plant 
sprouts clusters of swampy green berries even in the 
harshest weather and most inhospitable climes . Hardier 
than many plants, green air bramble requires very little 
water or soil, allowing it to be uprooted and transported 
for long stretches with ease, as long as it has a plentiful 
supply of fresh air . However, it is particularly suscep-
tible to poisons of all types . If exposed to such toxins, 
its berries swiftly wrinkle, turning a bright yellow in 
the process, and its normally healthy, small green leaves 
and tendrils turn brown and contract . This sensitivity 
makes the creeper a valuable first warning to travelers 
fearing toxins, and many green-thumbed adventurers 
carry staffs twined with green air bramble, or dangle 
lengths of it from their belts .
  As  long  as  you  are  carrying  a  length  of  green  air 
bramble in a visible location, such as coiled around a 
staff or on your person, you gain a +2 bonus on Forti-
tude saves made to resist inhaled 
poisons  and  airborne  sicken-
ing  or  nauseating  effects, 
such  as  those  created  by 
a  troglodyte’s  stench  or  a 
stinking  cloud spell .  Green 
air bramble grants no ben-
efit  against  sickening  or 
nauseating effects that don’t 
travel through the air, such 
as  a  cloaker’s  nauseating 
moan  or  the  distraction 
caused by a swarm . A 3-foot 
length  of  green  air  bramble  is 
required to gain a benefit from the 
plant . A length of the vine can be wrapped around a 
quarterstaff, polearm, longbow, or any similarly long-
hafted weapon without reducing its effectiveness . 
  Long-lived as well as hardy, a green air bramble lasts 
indefinitely if planted in moist soil for 6 hours per week . 
Once it is exposed to poison, however, the vine dies .
guT M IT es
The cause of a common, painful affliction among gigantic 
creatures, the pests called gut mites have been the salva-
tion of more than one unlucky monster hunter . Each no 
bigger than a human’s thumbnail, these white, flylike 
parasites lay their eggs in the preferred food of large 
predators . The grubs quickly hatch within a creature’s 
stomach and feast on the liquefied food within—and, 
when that food runs out, the tender flesh of its host’s gut . 
One or two make their presence known within a host 
by merely a dull aching, but a swarm of gut mites can 
leave even the mightiest beast coiled in pain . 
Green air bramble
Illus. by E. Cox

11 
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
  Harvested from the entrails of gigantic monsters, 
small swarms of these creatures are bottled 
and sold to those likely to encounter raven-
ous beasts . A typical bottle contains some 
adult  gut  mites  and  a  mass  of  squirming 
grubs in a nutrient goo . It is a blessing to any 
character who has been swallowed whole . 
  If you open a flask of gut mites while 
you  are  within  a  monster’s  gizzard  or 
stomach and pour out its ravenous con-
tents, the grubs burrow into the tissue . 
The monster immediately vomits up the 
contents  of  its  stomach,  including  any 
swallowed creatures, and cannot use its 
swallow whole ability for 1d4 minutes . 
A successful DC 20 Fortitude save ne-
gates this effect, and instead causes the 
swallowing creature to be sickened for 
1d4 minutes . Creatures immune to extra 
damage from critical hits are not affected by 
gut mites . 
  A flask of gut mites can be used only once . The adults 
die within a day or two, while the grubs can survive for a 
week before their nutrient medium is depleted .
JabberWeed
One of the few plants native to the Windswept Depths of 
Pandemonium, jabberweed is an ugly, tenacious root that 
looks something like a pocked, many-fingered, skeletal 
hand . The countless holes that riddle jabberweed constant-
ly gasp and wheeze, creating a low susurrus of background 
noise that is unnoticeable on the wind-scoured landscape 
of the plant’s home plane .
  Sprouts  of  jabberweed  are  sold  wrapped  in  moist 
cloth . While wrapped, the plant creates no noise . Once 
unwrapped  and  exposed  to  air,  it  begins  whispering, 
creating a low hissing audible out to 100 
feet   . Creatures that succeed on a DC 15 
Listen  check  notice  the  sound  of  the 
jabberweed  as  well  as  the  direction  of 
its  source .  Regardless  of  whether  any 
creatures notice the sound, all creatures 
within 100 feet of the plant take a –4 
penalty on other Listen checks, since 
the noise disguises and muffles many 
minor sounds . 
  If retrieved and repacked in moist 
cloth, jabberweed can be used multiple 
times while it lives . Jabberweed can sur-
vive for 1 week after being removed from 
its home plane . You can attempt a DC 18 
Knowledge  (nature)  check  once  per 
week to keep a sprout of jabberweed 
alive  for  that  week .  The  plant  dies  1 
week after a failed check . 
Planar MoTes
Having some of the characteristics of plants and 
some of animals, planar motes are native to the 
Outer Planes . They are wispy creatures, each about 
the size of a gold piece, resembling floating globules 
of  plane-stuff .  Their  shape  and  coloring  vary 
wildly and reflect their native planes . Planar 
motes from Arcadia, for example, look like 
large dandelion seeds, while those from Baa-
tor take the form of floating urchins spiked 
with  metal  barbs .  Largely  harmless  and 
seemingly unintelligent, planar motes are 
thought to be spontaneously generated by 
the planes themselves, although it is unclear 
for what purpose .
   Despite their strange nature and lack 
of Hit Dice, planar motes emit auras of 
moderate strength directly tied to the 
alignment of the plane they came from . 
A planar mote from Bytopia, for example, has a 
moderate aura of good, while a mote from the 
Abyss has moderate auras of both chaos and evil (see Chap-
ter 5 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide for the alignments of 
the Outer Planes) . So concentrated is a planar mote’s align-
ment aura that it can disguise your alignment while you 
carry it . Any alignment-detecting spell detects the align-
ment of the mote, as long as it is more powerful than your 
own alignment aura (PH 219) . For example, a 12th-level 
lawful good warrior carrying a planar mote from Arborea 
(chaotic and good) would register as chaotic good, since 
his aura is weaker than that of the mote . However, a 5th-
level lawful evil cleric of Hextor carrying the same mote 
would register as lawful evil, because his aura is strong, 
overpowering the mote’s .
   A planar mote is not a magic item; it does not take up 
space on the body or radiate magic . A planar mote func-
tions only for the creature it is in closest 
contact with . Relying on its home plane 
for  survival,  a  planar  mote  fades  away 
and  vanishes  1  week  +  1d6  days  after 
being  taken  from  its  native  plane .  A 
planar  mote  is  destroyed  if  subjected 
to the spells banishment, dismissal, dispel 
chaos/evil/good/law (corresponding  to 
the mote’s alignment), or protection from 
chaos/evil/good/law (corresponding to the 
mote’s alignment) . A planar mote can also 
be physically attacked . It has hardness 1 
and 5 hit points .
   Planar motes fly at a speed of 10 feet 
with  perfect  maneuverability .  To  gain 
one’s effect, a user must contain it in some 
manner or risk having it escape . A simple 
jar or box carried in the user’s pack often 
suffices .
Flask of gut mites
Planar motes
Illus. by M. Coimbra 
 
and H. Lyon

120
Cha  PT  er 5
sC oundrel
 
equ
IPM
en  T
   Much more rare are greater planar motes, which shed 
strong alignment auras . These more potent motes last for 
1 month + 2d6 days after removal from their home plane, 
but otherwise function in the same way as normal pla-
nar motes .
rus  T MonsTer Wand
The skittering larval young of rust monsters are just as insa-
tiable as adults when it comes to ferrous metals . Little more 
than 1 inch long and bristling with underdeveloped armor 
and appendages, these nuisances have 
the same rusting ability as mature 
rust  monsters,  their  whiplike 
antennae ever probing for the 
touch of metal . Some clever 
thieves have figured out that 
these creatures can be help-
ful when carefully harnessed 
in a suitable container .
   Such  a  container,  com-
monly  called  a  rust  monster 
wand,  is  a  1-foot-long  piece  of 
glass  tubing  about  4  inches  in 
diameter that contains about a dozen 
rust monster larvae . One end of the tube is 
sealed shut, and the other one is fitted with a 
two-layer wooden cap . The outer layer of this top covers the 
wand’s end; when closed, it prevents the larvae from touch-
ing anything outside the wand . The inside layer is a thin 
latticework that keeps the immature aberrations inside the 
tube but allows their antennae to extend through the holes 
in the lattice . Uncapping the solid cover and running the 
tip of the wand across a metal surface allows the hungry 
young to slowly but effectively eat through metal objects 
or barriers . The rust monster larvae in a wand can ruin a 
Large weapon or suit of armor (or a metal object of similar 
size) in 1 minute, a Medium weapon or suit of armor in 
9 rounds, or a Small weapon or suit of armor in 6 rounds . 
The wand is brittle and must be applied to a target rather 
delicately, so it cannot be used as a weapon . 
  The larvae within a rust monster wand can survive for 
about 2 months if given air (by opening the outer layer of 
the end cap) and fed the equivalent of five coins of metal 
(or more) per day . 
  If  removed  from  the  wand,  individual  larvae  do  not 
have the size or ability to do appreciable harm to metal 
equipment . One of these creatures by itself has 1 hit point 
and can be crushed as a standard action .
TorCh bug ITeMs
Common to plains and savannas, the sluggish torch bug 
looks like a bloated firefly . The insect’s bulbous abdomen, 
nearly the size of a child’s fist, accounts for more than half 
its body . When torch bugs are agitated, or during their 
lengthy mating season, their abdomens glow with a warm, 
yellow light . Inhabitants of areas thick with torch bugs 
harvest the sluggish insects for a variety of purposes .
Torch bug Paste
Bladders  made  from  severed  torch  bug  abdomens  are 
sold for the strange mixture of chemicals that grant the 
insects their glow . Each contains one application of the 
luminescent slime known as torch bug paste . These blad-
ders do not shed light, and the paste within does not begin 
glowing until exposed to air . 
 Torch bug paste can be applied to inanimate 
objects or living creatures . One bladder 
contains enough paste to paint up to a 
10-foot-square area; a full-round action 
is required per 5-foot square covered . 
A treated area glows for 1 hour and 
sheds as much light as a torch (em-
anating bright light out to 20 feet 
and shadowy illumination for an-
other 20 feet beyond that) . Torch 
bug paste makes a painted object 
highly visible, and it is often 
used as a temporary decoration 
or to mark targets in the dark . 
It can be used to write short words or simple 
symbols, but these marks must be rather large, 
since the paste’s glow obscures details .
       A bladder of torch bug paste can also be thrown as a 
splash weapon (PH 158). Treat this attack as a ranged touch 
attack with a range increment of 10 feet . A bladder of torch 
bug paste bursts upon striking a firm surface, covering the 
target and every adjacent creature or item with the glow-
ing chemical . Creatures struck by the paste are affected as 
if by a faerie fire spell for 1 hour . This effect is not magical 
and cannot be dispelled . Torch bug paste can be washed 
away from a creature or a 5-foot square as a full-round ac-
tion but requires at least 1 gallon of water .
Torch bug Tube
A torch bug tube is a 1-foot-long, sealed glass cylinder with 
ends capable of being unscrewed . Inside dwells a single 
adult torch bug . When the tube is shaken (a move action for 
any creature holding it), the insect inside becomes irritated 
and begins glowing . This glow sheds as much light as a 
torch (emanating bright light out to 20 feet and shadowy 
illumination for another 20 feet beyond that) . The light 
begins to dim as the bug calms down and goes out after 3 
minutes unless the tube is shaken again . A torch bug tube 
can be taken underwater without being extinguished and 
does not emanate a magical aura . 
  A torch bug can glow for up to 1 hour a day, after which it 
must eat and rest; torch bugs must be fed daily (they eat mostly 
smaller insects), or they grow too weak to shed light and 
eventually die . In addition, the tube end must be unscrewed 
once per day to replenish the insect’s air supply .
Torch bug tube
Illus. by C. Frank

coundrels thrive under pressure . In the panicked, 
harried moments that require one to act or be 
ruined, these quick-witted folk let instinct take 
over, trusting in their deft skills, sharp minds, 
and, sometimes, pure dumb luck to carry them 
through . Scoundrels buck trends and break the averages, 
taking on tasks and aiming for goals few would dare, facing 
danger with a do-or-die mentality that either brings glory 
and fame or paves the way to an early grave . For scoundrels, 
doing the impossible is the name of the game .
  Scoundrel  adventures  are  risky  and  unpredictable 
gambles against wildly unbalanced odds . Whether stealing 
the hoard out from under a sleeping dragon, convincing 
a  usurper  that  he’s  the  rightful  heir  to  the  throne,  or 
scamming the local church of Hextor and then escap-
ing far enough away not to care when the priests finally 
notice—such escapades are the dreams and daily doings 
of these daring dodgers .
  This chapter provides what the DM needs to run adven-
tures specially tailored to cunning and sharp-tongued 
scoundrel characters . Sample scoundrel adventures, the 
details specific to such exploits, and ideas for such quests 
should provide everything you need to challenge even 
the quickest-thinking swindler or sneak . You’ll also find 
some maps of sample locations useful for scoundrels to 
ply their art .
  In  addition,  the  new  organizations  and  contacts 
presented  here  offer  more  opportunities  to  mingle 
with like-minded characters, whether as helpful peers, 
cunning challengers, or sinister opponents . The legend-
ary sites described in this chapter are locations made 
specifically for scoundrels—places where they might 
push their limits, tempt fate, and make use of some of 
the new tricks and capabilities presented elsewhere 
in this book .
WhaT are sCoundrel 
advenTures?
Inside a vault hidden deep within Citadel Gashgnaw 
rests the Hyacinth of Inestimable Beauty, the greatest 
work of art the world has ever known . The Brother-
hood of the Bloody Palm stole the masterpiece five 
years ago . This army of brigands claimed Citadel 
Gashgnaw,  an  ancient,  cursed  fortress,  to  keep 
the Hyacinth their prisoner . To ensure this, they 
have  stocked  the  citadel  with  countless  traps, 
insidious magic, and monstrous creatures from 
throughout the planes . The vault itself is warded 
against all forms of penetration and teleportation, 
and the sole magic key dangles around the neck 
of the legendary bandit-gladiator-turned-warden, 
121
Illus. by D. Bircham

122