Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Table 2–1: Prestige Class Categories
Category	Prestige	Classes
Bad guys Avenging executioner
Good guys Gray guard, malconvoker
Melee Avenging executioner, gray guard
Ranged Spellwarp sniper
Magical  Magical trickster, malconvoker, spellwarp 
sniper
Sneaky  Avenging executioner, cloaked dancer, 
master of masks, mountebank
Support  Combat trapsmith, master of masks, 
psibond agent
Tricky   Battle trickster, fortune’s friend, magical 
trickster, uncanny trickster
avengIng exe  CuTI  oner
“Scream. Scream like you made me scream.”
—Peck, the Swan Street Slicer
In the broken hearts and shattered dreams of the tragically 
wronged, seeds of vengeance take root . Avenging execution-
ers are victims pushed past the limits of endurance who 
hunt sentient creatures out of a need for justice . Relentless 
and inventive, these stalkers wield psychology as deftly 
as their weapons . The fear they inspire can be even more 
deadly then their rusted blades .
beCoMI  ng an  
avengIng exe  CuTI  oner
Hatred so intense as to be obsession inspires an avenging 
executioner to take up his bloody path . Rangers who have 
suffered mind-shattering tragedies might be compelled to 
choose fellow humanoids as their favored enemies . Rogues 
who turn to the path of vengeance use their lethal preci-
sion to dreadful effect . Druids who have seen their lands 
despoiled and sorcerers or wizards who have been victims 
of witch hunts might turn their spells toward revenge . Any 
individual so driven can excel as an avenging executioner, 
regardless of class . 
Entry Requirements
Alignment: Any nongood. 
Base	Attack	Bonus: +5. 
Skills: Hide 4 ranks, Intimidate 6 ranks, Move Silently 4 ranks.
Special:	Must have been tragically wronged in some manner.
Class fea Tures
Hardened and tenacious, you use surprise and dread to 
weaken the subjects of your hatred .
 Bloody Blade (Ex): The fury of your attack is terrifying 
to see . Whenever you deal sudden strike damage (see below) 
with a melee weapon, the target of the sudden strike and 
all opponents within 30 feet of you who can see the target 
are shaken for a number of rounds equal to your avenging 
executioner level . A successful Will save (DC 10 + your 
avenging executioner level + your Cha modifier) negates 
this effect . Creatures whose HD exceed your character 
level are not affected . Bloody blade is a mind-affecting fear 
ability .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
bI  rd  Men and robbIng
POSTED,	by	the	Duskgate	Watch	Captain.
The Warbling Blades silversmithy was the scene of a robbery as 
daring as it is puzzling in today’s early morning hours. Owner 
Temril  Tomay  and  his  son  reported  a  waste  bin  was  thrown 
through the display window of their shop on Redwind Road by 
an unknown vandal, shattering the glass and laying bare several 
hundred gold kings’ worth of silverwork and jewelry. Remark-
ably, nothing was stolen at this point.
    The city watch was summoned. While the Tomays waited for 
the patrol, the sound of numerous quick explosions was heard 
from Duskgate Road a mere block away, followed by the sound 
of  watch  whistles  being  blown.  The  noise  attracted  the  atten-
tion of numerous citizens, including the Tomays, who left their 
vandalized  and  only  hastily  repaired  shop  to  investigate.  The 
patrol heading to the Warbling Blades also diverted to answer 
the whistles, which are issued exclusively to the city watch.
    On  reaching  the  scene,  the  patrol  found  no  source  of  the 
explosions and no guards who had sounded the watch whistles. 
The watch dispersed the crowd and returned with the Tomays to 
their  defaced  shop.  Upon  arriving,  they  found  the  shop  nearly 
emptied,  with  silver  merchandise  valued  at  upward  of  300 
platinum emperors missing. Answers given by the Tomays during 
questioning  suggested  few  suspects,  but  watch  investigators 
did discover several abnormally long black feathers at the crime 
scene.  Eyewitnesses  also  reported  that  three  black-clad  figures 
wearing  masks  with  ridiculously  long  noses  had  entered  and 
then swiftly left the Warbling Blades not long after the strange 
sounds on Duskgate Road. Several vendors on Duskgate also 
noted  a  fourth  masked  and shrouded figure entering a nearby 
alley  from  which  the  strange  sounds  seemed  to  emanate  not 
long before the incident.
    Members of the watch wish to question these masked “bird-
men.” Anyone seeing figures matching this description should 
alert the nearest patrol.
Table 2–2:  
The Avenging Executioner  Hit Die: d8
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special
1st +0 +0 +2 +2 Bloody blade, 
     sudden strike +1d6
2nd +1   +0 +3 +3 Rapid intimidation
3rd +2 +1   +3 +3 Sudden strike +2d6
4th +3 +1   +4 +4 Dread blade
5th +3 +1   +4 +4 Bloody murder, 
     sudden strike +3d6
Class	Skills	(6 	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Balance, Bluff, 
Climb, Craft, Disguise, Escape Artist, Hide, Intimidate, 
Jump, Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Profession, Spot, 
Use Rope.

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
 Sudden Strike (Ex): If you can catch an opponent when 
he is unable to defend himself effectively from your attack, 
you can strike a vital spot for extra damage . See the ninja’s 
sudden strike class feature in the sidebar below .
 Rapid Intimidation (Ex): Beginning at 2nd level, you 
can attempt to demoralize an opponent as a move action 
instead of a standard action . See the Intimidate skill (PH 77) 
for details .
  If you have the favored enemy class feature, you can 
add your favored enemy bonus to Intimidate checks made 
to  demoralize  foes  of  the  chosen  type  (and  subtype,  if 
applicable) .
 Dread Blade (Ex): Starting at 4th level, you can exploit 
the terror you inspire to further brutalize your target . You 
treat shaken, frightened, or panicked creatures as flat-footed 
for the purpose of dealing sudden strike damage .
 Bloody Murder (Ex): Starting at 5th level, if you deal 
enough damage with a melee attack to drop a creature 
(typically by reducing it to below 0 hit points or killing 
it),  all  enemies  within  30  feet  of  you  who  can  see  the 
target become frightened for 1 round . A successful Will 
save (DC 10 + your avenging executioner level + your Cha 
modifier) lessens the effect to shaken . Creatures whose 
HD exceed your character level are not affected . Bloody 
murder is a mind-affecting fear ability .
PlaYI  ng an  
avengIng exe  CuTI  oner
You are a warrior of dark passions and an agent of your own 
brand of justice . Your path is not one of wanton bloodlet-
ting,  but  a  search  for  righteousness  where  none  exists, 
a measure of punishment no court would dare impose, 
and a way to finally silence screams that long have gone 
unanswered . By your blade you are judge and executioner 
in a world where innocence is yours alone to decide and 
forgiveness is weakness . And for your prey there can never 
be restitution .
  As an avenging executioner, you are driven by a thirst 
for revenge, whether against a person, a group, or even a 
whole race . You seek to share your fear and suffering with 
those you perceive as responsible . You are often alone in 
your quest—few understand your obsession . Occasionally 
you find others as impassioned as you and together strive 
for vengeance against a common enemy, but such kindred 
spirits are rare .
  Your past is gone, and many fear you . You operate on 
the fringes of society . In darkened alleys, dank sewers, 
and lonely moors, you build your reputation and grow in 
strength . 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
skIrMI  sh and sudden sTrIke
Many of the prestige class examples presented in this chapter, 
as well as new feats presented in Chapter 3, refer to the ninja 
and  scout  from  the Complete Adventurer  supplement.  Each 
of  those  classes  has  a  signature  special  attack  (sudden  strike 
and  skirmish,  respectively).  For  ease  of  reference,  these  class 
features are summarized here. 
sudden sTrIke (ex)
If  a  ninja  can  catch  an  opponent  when  it  is  unable  to  defend 
itself effectively from her attack, she can strike a vital spot for 
extra damage. Whenever a ninja’s target is denied a Dexterity 
bonus to Armor Class (whether the target actually has a Dexter-
ity bonus or not), the ninja deals an extra 1d6 points of damage 
with her attack. This extra damage increases by 1d6 points for 
every two ninja levels after 1st (to a maximum of 10d6 at 19th 
level). A ninja can’t use sudden strike when flanking an oppo-
nent unless that opponent is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC.
 This damage also applies to ranged attacks against targets up 
to 30 feet away. Creatures with concealment, creatures without 
discernible anatomies, and creatures immune to extra damage 
from critical hits are all immune to sudden strikes. A ninja can’t 
make  a  sudden  strike  while  attacking  the  limbs  of  a  creature 
whose vitals are out of reach.
    A ninja can’t use sudden strike to deliver nonlethal damage. 
Weapons capable of dealing only nonlethal damage don’t deal 
extra damage when used as part of a sudden strike.
    The extra damage from the sudden strike ability stacks with 
the extra damage from sneak attack whenever both would apply 
to  the  same  target.  For  the  purpose  of  qualifying  for  feats, 
prestige  classes,  and  similar  options  that  require  a  minimum 
number  of  extra  damage  dice,  treat  the  ninja’s  sudden  strike 
ability as the equivalent of sneak attack.
skIrMI  sh (ex)
A scout relies on mobility to deal extra damage and improve her 
defense. She deals an extra 1d6 points of damage on all attacks 
she  makes  during  any  round  in  which  she  moves  at  least  10 
feet. The extra damage applies only to attacks taken during the 
scout’s turn. This extra damage increases by 1d6 for every four 
levels gained above 1st (2d6 at 5th, 3d6 at 9th, 4d6 at 13th, and 
5d6 at 17th level).
    The  extra  damage  applies  only  against  living  creatures  that 
have a discernible anatomy. Undead, constructs, oozes, plants, 
incorporeal creatures, and creatures immune to extra damage 
from critical hits are not vulnerable to this additional damage. 
The scout must be able to see the target well enough to pick out 
a vital spot and must be able to reach such a spot. Scouts can 
apply this extra damage to ranged attacks made while skirmish-
ing, but only if the target is within 30 feet.
    At 3rd level, a scout gains a +1 competence bonus to Armor 
Class during any round in which she moves at least 10 feet. The 
bonus applies as soon as the scout has moved 10 feet and lasts 
until  the  start  of  her  next  turn.  This  bonus  improves  by  1  for 
every four levels gained above 3rd (+2 at 7th, +3 at 11th, +4 at 
15th, and +5 at 19th level).
    A  scout  loses  this  ability  when  wearing  medium  or  heavy 
armor or when carrying a medium or heavy load. If she gains 
the skirmish ability from another class, the bonuses stack.

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Combat
The  aspects  of  fear—surprise,  intimidation,  and  hope-
lessness—are  vital  weapons  in  your  arsenal .  Given  the 
opportunity,  you  should  always  attack  unexpectedly  to 
cripple your prey with terror . Those who stand their ground 
must face your blade and the dread you wield along with it . 
Retreat and strike again from hiding against more powerful 
opponents or those unaffected by fear . When your prey 
flees, hunt it down and ambush it repeatedly, inspiring 
ever greater dread and panic with which to slowly tear it 
apart . 
advancement
Tragedy led you to your current life . The loss of a friend to 
a savage raid, betrayal by a church that promised sanctuary, 
abandonment by friends who swore their support—any 
such great wrong might have caused you to break from 
those you once trusted . Your hunger for revenge is insa-
tiable . You are constantly on the move, pursuing quarry 
gone to ground or members of the group that wronged you, 
or striving to wipe out every last one of a hated people .
  Stealth  and  intimidation  are  your  favored  tools,  so 
improving  related  skills  is  key  to  both  your  hunt  and 
your survival . Choose feats such as Combat Reflexes and 
Mobility, or movement skill tricks such as Twisted Charge 
or Dismount Attack, that allow you to get past obstacles to 
reach even the best-guarded target . 
resources
Most of what you have you took, whether out of necessity 
or as possessions “reclaimed” from defeated prey . The laws 
of the world no longer serve you, so you take what you see 
as yours by right . You don’t seek to harm innocents, but 
the ignorant and complacent cannot be allowed to impede 
your mighty work .
avengIng exe  CuTI  oners  
In   The World
“If she didn’t wake up screaming, she wouldn’t wake up at all.”
—Lieutenant Nanci Tomason, 
discussing an avenging executioner
Avenging executioners fall into a gray (perhaps dark gray) 
area between heroes and villains . One might slaughter 
priests of St . Cuthbert because he believes the deity for-
sook him at a vital moment, while another remorselessly 
hunts yuan-ti to exact vengeance from the creatures who 
slaughtered his children . The former could be a fearsome 
enemy, but the latter might share the same goals as the 
party and be a formidable ally—at least until he has taken 
his revenge .
organization
The life of an avenging executioner is often lonely . His 
single-minded determination sets him on a path few can 
follow, and he distances himself from those he might care 
for, realizing that any who share his life also risk sharing 
his death . Having lost so much, an avenging executioner 
grows accustomed to the bitter freedom of an outcast .
  Loneliness is not the way of all avenging executioners, 
however . Those who did not face their tragedies alone take 
up arms with their fellow victims . The survivors of a tribe 
wiped out by gnolls or of a mercenary party betrayed by 
its cold-hearted employer might band together for retri-
bution .  The  most  intelligent  and  cool-headed  avenging 
executioners master their hatred and control their thirst 
for justice . These individuals see the need for and benefits 
of companionship just as others do, although they have a 
more calculating perspective that takes into account who 
might aid them in their bloody work . Such a mastermind 
might  create  an  entire  organization,  turning  a  thieves’ 
guild into an army of assassins, a band of barbarians into 
a berserker horde, or an adventuring company into a lethal 
strike force .
nPC    reactions
Fear  not  only  empowers  an  avenging  executioner,  but 
also shackles him like a chain . Reports of murders move 
swiftly through an area as the corpses pile up . Avenging 
executioners earn frightening appellations, such as Jack-in-
Irons, the Lantern Man, or the Swan Street Slicer, inspired 
by their methods or hunting grounds . As the body count 
increases, so do the rumors grow from murmured warn-
ings to fearsome legends . Few stop to consider whether 
an avenging executioner might have an agenda beyond 
wanton slaughter . Fear is never rational, and terrorized 
bystanders are quick to imagine themselves in the place 
of the hunted, even if the killer’s victims are related in a 
way that does not apply to them (such as belonging to a 
powerful thieves’ guild) .
  However,  exceptions  do  exist .  Those  wronged  who 
cannot or will not take matters into their own hands might 
adopt an avenging executioner as their personal champion . 
Some in power see avenging executioners as useful vigi-
lantes and might step outside the bounds of their offices 
to support—or, far less ethically, create—such desperate 
hunters .
avengIng exe  CuTI  oner lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can research 
avenging executioners to learn more about them . When a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10:  Avenging  executioners  are  serial  killers  who 
haunt the alleys and lonely places beneath the surface of 
society .
 DC 15: Avenging executioners make deft use of fear to 
incapacitate and control those they hunt . They are remorse-
less and single-minded in their pursuit of prey .
 DC 20: While often unhinged, avenging executioners 
are not random murderers . A great wrong or tragedy leads 
them to hunt down those they hold responsible . Only those 

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
who guard an avenging executioner’s prey or who hinder 
his pursuit need fear his blade .
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn  important  details  about  specific  avenging  execu-
tioners in your campaign, including notable individuals 
currently operating in specific areas, possible reasons for 
their actions, and theories about their targets .
  Avenging executioners are notoriously difficult to find . 
Some  set  up  trophy-laden  hideouts,  while  others  range 
abroad to track down their prey and might be encoun-
tered nearly anywhere . The most likely way to encounter 
an  avenging  executioner  is  to  determine  the  location 
of his next target and wait there . Even then, attempting 
conversation might have to wait until after he completes 
his grisly work, lest the PCs become mere obstacles to be 
dealt with .
avengIng exe  CuTI  oners  
In   The gaMe
Whether  an  avenging  executioner  becomes  your 
campaign’s  next  villain  or  a  somber  addition  to  the 
party depends on the targets of his hatred . If the prime 
antagonist is a nation of cannibal gnolls, a cult of the 
devil lord Levistus, or a similar evil entity, an avenging 
executioner could be a PC traumatized by such a group . 
This  driven  loner  is  little  different  from  most  druids, 
rangers,  warlocks,  or  other  characters  who  commonly 
operate outside society . Thus, integrating a heroic aveng-
ing executioner requires only that both he and the 
party fight the same enemy .
  As an antagonist, an avenging executioner can 
be an ongoing dark legend . His career begins 
with a single murder, then another, and another, 
each with the same hallmarks . Perhaps a wit-
ness gets a glimpse of the killer . Such a chain 
of events should interest PCs in the slayings, 
leading  them  to  learn  what  connected  the 
victims and figure out who might be next . 
Their investigations lead them to confront 
the avenging executioner, either to end the 
killings or, depending on the nature of his 
targets, aid in his fearsome hunt .
adaptation
An avenging executioner can fit into any 
campaign setting . In worlds where a spe-
cific nation or race faces prejudice, some 
members of that people might fight back 
as avenging executioners . Campaigns that 
take place far from the intrigues of the 
city might see avenging executioners 
as dark woodland hunters, radical 
allies of druids and rangers and 
punishers of those who despoil 
nature .  Another  option  might 
have  avenging  executioners  of 
terrible ability but dull wit adopted by a government or 
church as secret police, deadly hounds set loose upon the 
group’s enemies .
sample encounter
An  avenging  executioner  presents  PCs  with  a  moral 
quandary .  Having  been  terribly  wronged,  he  can  be  a 
sympathetic figure, one whose cause is righteous even if 
his methods are distasteful . Lawful PCs might be forced 
to ask themselves how just a society can be that allows 
obvious injustices to occur . 
 EL  10: A homeless mute, Peck (as his masters called 
him) was discovered as a child huddled on the doorstep 
of a noble household on posh Swan Street . He was taken 
in by the family but did not find comfort or generosity 
there; rather, he was pressed into domestic service with 
only a dog’s cage for a room . Little more than a slave to 
the old, sybaritic, and abusive family, the halfling faced 
demeaning chores and daily physical and verbal abuses . 
Eighteen years of constant exploitation left Peck deathly 
ill, and his cruel-hearted masters merely pitched him out 
of their manor like so much refuse .
  Against all odds, though, Peck endured and recovered . 
Finally free after a lifetime of indignities, the mute halfling 
took up a blade and headed back toward Swan Street . Now 
Peck, the Swan Street Slicer,  
an avenging executioner
Illus. by E. Cox

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
he  takes  revenge  on  the  city’s  fiscally  rich  but  morally 
bankrupt, starting with those who had used him for so 
many years .
Peck, The Swan Street Slicer CR 10
Male halfling rogue 7/avenging executioner 3
CN Small humanoid
Init +4; Senses Listen +11, Spot +13
Languages	Common, Halfling (cannot speak)
AC 21, touch 15, flat-footed 21; Dodge, Mobility, uncanny 
dodge
 (+1 size, +4 Dex, +5 armor, +1 natural)
hp 61 (10 HD)
Resist	evasion
Fort +6, Ref +13, Will +7 (+9 against fear)
Speed 20 ft. (4 squares)
Melee +1 short sword +13/+8 (1d4/19–20 plus poison)
Ranged tanglefoot bag +13 touch (special)
Base	Atk	+7; Grp	+2
Atk	Options bloody blade, poison (giant wasp poison, Fort 
DC 14, 1d6 Dex/1d6 Dex), sneak attack +4d6, sudden 
strike +2d6
Special	Actions rapid intimidation
Combat	Gear	5 doses of giant wasp poison, 2 tanglefoot bags
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 19, Con 14, Int 8, Wis 12, Cha 13
SQ trap sense +2, trapfinding
Feats Dodge, Mobility, Stealthy, Weapon Finesse
Skills Balance +9, Climb +1, Disguise +3, Escape Artist +7, 
Gather Information +3, Hide +21, Intimidate +13, Jump +4, 
Knowledge (local) +4, Listen +11, Move Silently +20, Open 
Lock +9, Spot +13, Tumble +, Use Rope +7
Possessions combat gear plus +2 studded leather armor,	+1 
short sword,	amulet of natural armor +1, boots of elvenkind,	
2 potions of darkvision, 2 potions of invisibility, rope of climb-
ing, masterwork thieves’ tools
Bloody	Blade	(Ex) Whenever Peck deals sudden strike 
damage, opponents with 10 or fewer HD within 30 feet are 
shaken for 3 rounds; Will DC 14 negates.
baTT  le TrICks  Ter
“Oh, I’m terribly sorry. Is that my blade in your gut?”
—Elibor Gunter, battle trickster
The battle trickster engages in combat not only to defeat 
enemies but to impress them with martial and acrobatic 
prowess . He amazes onlookers with daring and death-defy-
ing stunts, making a spectacle of war .
beCoMI  ng a baTT  le TrIC ks  Ter
Swashbucklers make up the majority of battle tricksters, 
since their abilities already so closely mimic those of the 
prestige class . Most of the rest are rangers, along with the 
occasional fighter whose high Intelligence provides extra 
skill  points .  Bards  or  rogues  sometimes  pick  up  a  few 
levels of battle trickster, though such characters prefer the 
uncanny trickster prestige class (page 67) . 
Entry Requirements
Base	Attack	Bonus: +5. 
Skills: Any three skills 6 ranks each. 
Skill Tricks: Any two. 
Class fea Tures
The battle trickster excels at combining skill tricks with 
normal combat .
 Bonus Trick: At 1st level, and again at 3rd level, you gain 
a bonus skill trick for which you meet the prerequisite . 
These bonus tricks do not cost skill points and do not count 
against your maximum number of skill tricks available .
 Bonus Feat: At 2nd level, you gain a bonus feat for which 
you meet the prerequisite . This feat must be selected from 
the list of fighter bonus feats .
 Tricky Fighting (Ex): At 3rd level, you have mastered 
incorporating skill tricks into your combat routines . In 
any round when you perform a skill trick, you gain a +1 
competence bonus on the next attack roll you make that 
round .
PlaYI  ng a baTT  le TrIC ks  Ter
Whereas magical tricksters (page 45) and uncanny trick-
sters (page 67) can be show-offs, you never use your tricks 
to get attention, no matter how flashy they are . You might 
not be quiet about your abilities, but you don’t flaunt them . 
When combat begins, they speak for themselves .
  You work well with both combat specialists and other 
kinds of tricksters . Becoming a skill trick expert instantly 
affiliates  you  with  a  very  loose  fellowship  of  tricksters 
(magical, uncanny, and battle) . You don’t get along with 
every trickster you meet, though: Some jealously guard 
their secrets and view others of their kind as rivals .
Combat
Whereas other tricksters might flit about the battlefield, 
looking for just the right opportunity to perform a spec-
tacular combat-ending strike, you stand near the front lines . 
Your fighting experience, solid hit points, and repertoire 
of feats and skill tricks offer you the flexibility to serve as a 
front-line battler or in a supporting role . You don’t see your 
tricks as ways to impress onlookers or intimidate foes, but 
rather as additional weapons in your arsenal .
advancement
You don’t become a battle trickster in a vacuum . You prob-
ably had a mentor at some point, someone who sensed 
Table 2–3: The Battle Trickster Hit Die: d10
	Base				
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will	
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special
1st +1 +2 +0 +0 Bonus trick
2nd +2 +3 +0 +0 Bonus feat
3rd +3 +3 +1 +1 Bonus trick, 
     tricky fighting
Class	Skills	(4	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Balance, Bluff, 
Climb, Craft, Handle Animal, Jump, Profession, Ride, 
Swim, Tumble, Use Rope.

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
your  boredom  with  traditional  fighting  techniques .  Or 
you might be self-taught, watching other unconventional 
combatants and endlessly repeating the movements you 
saw  . Once you learned the basics, you decided to move 
on to more advanced battle techniques .
  Through  self-sacrifice  and  hard 
work, you managed to learn enough 
basic  skill  tricks  that  picking  up 
more has become easy . You know 
some  skills,  perhaps  a  wider 
array than most who pursue 
your profession, but you are 
not necessarily a master of 
any one of them . 
  Just as you spent so much time 
learning  basic  skill  tricks,  you 
must continue to practice the 
more  advanced  techniques . 
Fortunately,  this  prestige 
class offers strong support 
in skill points and access 
to bonus tricks . Your feat 
selection should support 
your skill tricks as well 
as your preferred mode 
of  combat .  If  you  fo-
cus  on  movement  tricks, 
choose feats that allow you 
to  move  faster  or  traverse 
difficult obstacles more eas-
ily;  if  you  rely  on  Combat 
Expertise to thwart attackers, 
you’ll get more punch by focusing on 
that feat tree .
resources
Although you might not have realized it when you became 
a battle trickster, you are part of a larger (albeit very loosely 
organized) group . The benefits and requirements of this 
group are few, but it does offer the camaraderie of shared 
experiences as well as the chance to learn new tricks . 
Nevertheless, tricksters owe no more to one 
another than do any other people with 
similar, nonbinding interests .
baTT  le 
Tr  IC ks  Ters  
In   The World
“He came at me from out of 
nowhere. One moment he’s 
not there, and the next he is. 
I don’t know what he did to 
me, but it hurt.”
—Theta Sunglory, 
survivor
The battle trickster makes 
an excellent irregular sol-
dier  operating  in  a  small 
group  of  specialists,  such 
as  an  adventuring  party . 
Whether  scrumming  toe  to 
toe in the front line or engaging 
a distant foe, the battle trickster 
holds his own in any combat sit-
uation . He usually continues to 
specialize in whatever role he held 
before joining the prestige class, al-
beit with unusual techniques .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
buYer beWare
My Good Lord Siekes:
    Your  lordship,  I  hope  this  missive  finds  you,  the  illustrious 
lady Siekes, your noble heirs, your impressive holdings in Saerb, 
and your vast portfolio well and more than well. With your indul-
gence, as your dutifully attentive and personally appointed agent 
to your southern claims, I have news of interest to report.
    I’ll  not  trouble  your  valuable  time  with  the  specif ics  of 
my journey: the crass caravaneers, the fetid foods, the ram-
shackle f lyspeck villages, the sanctimonious droning of my 
fellow passenger (a would-be devotee of the Saint), nor the 
dark-eyed things that scampered and leaped in the shadows 
of the surrounding woodlands, their sharp faces full of quiet 
menace whenever they appeared. Worry not; we Shimbleses 
are no complainers.
    My news in fact is most exciting: I have already opened deal-
ings to acquire for you a lucrative holding, from a most unlikely 
source. A local halfling I’ve recently ingratiated myself with turns 
out  to  be  the  owner  of  one  Felfeather  Bridge,  a  lengthy  span 
crossing  a  swift  river,  and  the  only  viable  crossing  from  here 
to all points west. For a reasonable sum (the entire allowance 
you’ve afforded me, plus a bit more), I’ve made a deposit toward 
purchasing this bottleneck on all trade in the region.
    My  new  compatriot  did  ask  me  to  relay  a  strange  bit  of 
“advice” to you, though—as if such a scallywag had any means 
to instruct upon my lordship. His words were: “Rooks don’t live 
in Saerb alone.” The yokel’s turn toward ornithological interests 
baffled me, and I’ve seen no crows in the area of your soon-to-
be-purchased bridge, but as a competent and attentive servant 
I’m bound to report this detail.
    That brings a merry close to my report, your lordship. If, with 
all  wisdom  and  haste,  you  might  send  an  additional  270,673 
gold crowns, I will see to the final acquisition of your new hold-
ings here. 
 
Your perspicacious servant,
 
Bysryn Shimbles
Elibor Gunter,  
a battle trickster
Illus. by W. Mahy

0
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
organization
Battle tricksters congregate only on an occasional basis, 
usually along with magical tricksters and uncanny trick-
sters (although they make up the smallest number in such 
a mixed group) . They swap techniques, introduce newly de-
veloped tricks and trick-supporting equipment and magic, 
and share experiences . Outside observers might assume 
such a meeting is part of a circus or carnival, with trick-
sters springing about performing for the enjoyment and 
education of onlookers . 
  These gatherings, though enjoyable, do not represent 
a  structured  organization .  Battle  tricksters  looking  to 
become part of something more permanent usually join 
groups that appreciate both their abilities and their moral 
choices: police forces, thieves’ guilds, and military or guard 
units . 
nPC    reactions
Battle tricksters are impressive and terrifying in combat . 
People  who  have  witnessed  them  in  action  treat  them 
with respect, even awe . Most strangers have a friendly 
attitude, or at least a false warmth brought on by intimida-
tion (whether intended or not) . Some are jealous of battle 
tricksters and their abilities, or covet such prowess for 
themselves . They treat battle tricksters with calculated 
indifference,  and  the  most  petty  of  such  people  are 
unfriendly .
  Because  tricksters  run  the  entire  gamut  of  morality, 
some use their abilities to take advantage of less talented 
folk   . A victim of such exploitation has a negative view of 
all tricksters and is unfriendly at best . 
baTT  le TrIC ks  Ter    lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (history) or Knowl-
edge (local) can research battle tricksters to learn more 
about them . When a character succeeds on a skill check, 
the following lore is revealed, including the information 
from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Battle tricksters employ unusual talents in 
combat .
 DC 15: Battle tricksters don’t stop practicing other abili-
ties just because they start to learn tricks .
 DC 20: Not every battle trickster is a swashbuckling 
acrobat—some  of  them  are  also  raging  barbarians  or 
righteous paladins . They use skill tricks to enhance their 
existing talents .
 DC 30:  Characters  who  achieve  this  level  of  success 
can learn important details about specific battle tricksters 
in  your  campaign,  including  a  notable  individual,  the 
area in which he operates, and the kinds of activities he 
undertakes .
  Because battle tricksters operate in small groups of mixed 
abilities or in connection with military units, the easiest 
way to find one is to contact the local garrison or sheriff and 
inquire about individuals with unique fighting talents .
baTT  le TrIC ks  Ters In   The gaMe
Battle tricksters are frighteningly effective opponents with 
a few surprises in store . A single one in a group of standard 
combatants  makes  an  excellent  leader .  The  majority  of 
battle tricksters are not villains, but they can be entertain-
ing bodyguards for the party’s antagonist .
  Anyone who enjoys playing swashbucklers and similar 
characters  who  perform  over-the-top,  cinematic  acts  of 
daring should find the battle trickster an interesting PC 
choice . The prestige class does not hamper a fighting class’s 
abilities, so even someone who prefers the role of front-
line combatant might enjoy the slight change of pace and 
increased flexibility offered by the prestige class . 
adaptation
The battle trickster is already a very generalized prestige 
class that can easily fit into any campaign setting . It does 
rely on the new rules for skill tricks, however, so it is not 
suitable for a campaign that does not incorporate them . 
Replacing bonus tricks with extra feats from the fighter 
list can repurpose the character as a combat specialist with 
a more generalized approach to skills .
sample encounter
Battle tricksters are always looking for ways to do what they 
do best . If there’s a fight nearby, a battle trickster moves 
toward it as fast as he can .
 EL 15: The PCs might run across Elibor Gunter just before, 
during, or just after a combat in which he faces numerous 
opponents . He takes any opportunity to pick a fight, whether 
it be a bar brawl, a back-alley rumble, or a challenge to loiter-
ing thugs . The more opponents, the better—he plunges 
into their midst, mad with battle lust, whirling his spiked 
chain to disarm anyone within reach . Depending on the 
situation, the PCs might befriend Elibor by helping him 
against overwhelming odds, or they might make him into 
a terrible foe by trying to keep him out of a fight .
Elibor Gunter CR 15
Male dwarf fighter 12/battle trickster 3
CN Medium humanoid
Init +1; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Listen +0, Spot +0
Languages Common, Dwarven, Terran, Undercommon
AC 22, touch 12, flat-footed 21; Dodge, Mobility, +4 AC 
against giants
 (+1 Dex, +9 armor, +1 deflection, +1 natural)
hp 117 (15 HD) 
Resist stability (+4 against bull rush and trip)
Fort +13 (+15 against poison), Ref +6, Will +5; +2 on saves 
against spells and spell-like effects
Speed 20 ft. (4 squares); Spring Attack
Melee	+2 ghost touch spiked chain +24/+19/+14 (2d4+13)
Base	Atk	+15; Grp	+20
Atk	Options Improved Disarm, Improved Trip, Quick Draw, 
Whirlwind Attack, +1 on attacks against orcs and gobli-
noids, skill tricks, tricky fighting
Abilities	Str 20, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 6
SQ stonecunning (PH 15)

1
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Feats Combat Expertise, Dodge
B
, Exotic Weapon Proficiency 
(spiked chain), Freerunner*, Greater Weapon Focus 
(spiked chain)
B
, Greater Weapon Specialization (spiked 
chain)
B
, Improved Disarm, Improved Trip
B
, Mobility, Quick 
Draw
B
, Spring Attack, Weapon Focus (spiked chain), 
Weapon Specialization (spiked chain)
B
, Whirlwind Attack
B
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Balance +6, Bluff +3, Climb +17, Diplomacy +0, Disguise 
–2 (+0 acting), Intimidate +8, Jump +14, Listen +0, Sleight 
of Hand +8, Spot +0, Tumble +6 
Skill	Tricks* Corner Perch, Extreme Leap
B
, Hidden Blade, 
Leaping Climber, Never Outnumbered, Nimble Charge, 
Speedy Ascent
B
, Spot the Weak Point, Twisted Charge
B
, 
Up the Hill, Walk the Walls
B
, Wall Jumper
 *Described in Chapter 3
Possessions	+4 mithral breastplate, +2 ghost touch spiked 
chain, amulet of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, 
gauntlets of ogre power
Cloaked dan  Cer
“Watch  me.  Watch  my  dance.  Ignore  my  hands.  Ignore  your 
death.”
—Mina Longacre, reciting the cloaked dancer’s mantra
The cloaked dancer dances into the hearts and minds of 
her audience, beguiling those around her with boundless 
charm and careful dance moves, leaving her victims in a 
state of ecstasy even as she kills them .
beCoMI  ng a Cloaked dan  Cer
Bards most often and most easily become cloaked dancers, 
although a substantial number of rogues and some monks 
also enter the prestige class . Ninjas and spellthieves occa-
sionally travel the path of the cloaked dancer, although they 
have difficulty qualifying unless they multiclass, usually 
with a few levels of bard . 
Entry Requirements
Skills: Hide 5 ranks, Perform (dance) 10 ranks, Sleight of 
Hand 5 ranks.
Class fea Tures
The cloaked dancer distracts and fascinates her enemies, 
allowing her to strike unexpectedly  .  .  .   and with deadly 
effect .
 Spellcasting: At each even-numbered level, you gain 
new spells per day and an increase in caster level (and spells 
known, if applicable) as if you had also gained a level in 
an arcane spellcasting class to which you belonged before 
adding the prestige class level . You do not, however, gain 
any other benefit a character of that class would have gained . 
If you had more than one arcane spellcasting class before 
becoming a cloaked dancer, you must decide to which class 
to add each level for the purpose of determining spells per 
day, caster level, and spells known .
 Enchanting  Dance  (Su):  Once  per  day  per  cloaked 
dancer level, you can use your dance to produce supernatu-
ral effects on those who observe you . Each ability requires 
both a minimum cloaked dancer level and a minimum 
number of ranks in the Perform (dance) skill to qualify; 
if you do not have the required number of ranks, you do 
not gain the enchanting dance ability until you acquire 
them . This ability can be used only if you are wearing 
light armor or no armor and carrying no more than a light 
load   . Enchanting dance is an enchantment (compulsion), 
mind-affecting ability .
  Starting an enchanting dance effect is a standard action . 
You must concentrate each round to maintain the dance; 
no dance can be maintained for more rounds than your 
cloaked dancer level + your Con modifier (minimum 1 
round) . 
  The save DC for your enchanting dance effects is 10 + 
your cloaked dancer level + your Cha modifier . A creature 
can’t be affected again by your enchanting dance effect for 
24 hours whether or not it succeeds on the saving throw .
 Beguiling Dance: A cloaked dancer with 10 or more ranks 
in Perform (dance) can use her enchanting dance to distract 
her enemies . Whenever you start or maintain a beguiling 
dance, all enemies within 30 feet who can see you must 
succeed on a Will save or be dazed for 1 round . Creatures 
that fail this save also have their attitude improved by one 
step for as long as you maintain the dance (see Influencing 
NPC Attitudes, PH 74)   . This attitude adjustment does not 
prevent any subsequent attitude changes . For example, an 
enemy that becomes indifferent toward you as a result of 
this effect still turns hostile if you then attack it . 
 Wearying Dance: A 3rd-level cloaked dancer with 12 or 
more ranks in Perform (dance) can use her enchanting 
dance to tire her enemies . Whenever you start or maintain 
Table 2–4: The Cloaked Dancer  Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Spellcasting
1st +0 +0 +2 +0 Enchanting dance (beguiling dance) —
2nd +1 +0 +3 +0 Surprise strike +1d6 +1 level of existing arcane spellcasting class
3rd +2 +1 +3 +1 Enchanting dance (wearying dance) —
4th +3 +1 +4 +1 Surprise strike +2d6 +1 level of existing arcane spellcasting class
5th +3 +1 +4 +1 Enchanting dance (frightful dance) —
Class	Skills	(6	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Appraise, Balance, Bluff, Climb, Concentration, Craft, Diplomacy, Disguise, Escape 
Artist, Gather Information, Jump, Perform, Profession, Sense Motive, Sleight of Hand, Speak Language, Swim, Tumble, Use 
Magic Device, Use Rope.

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
a wearying dance, all enemies within 30 feet who can see 
you must succeed on a Will save or be fatigued for as long 
as you maintain the dance . Creatures failing this save that 
are already fatigued become exhausted .
 Frightful  Dance: A 5th-level cloaked dancer with 14 or 
more ranks in Perform (dance) can use her enchanting 
dance to scare her enemies . When-
ever  you  start  or  maintain  a 
frightful dance, all enemies 
within 30 feet who can see 
you must succeed on a Will 
save or be shaken for as long 
as you maintain the dance . 
Creatures  failing  this  save 
that  are  already  shaken  be-
come frightened, and those 
that are already frightened 
become panicked .
 Surprise  Strike  (Ex): 
Beginning  at  2nd  level, 
you can make a particular-
ly effective attack against 
creatures  distracted  by 
your dance . As a full-round 
action, you can maintain your 
enchanting dance and make a melee attack 
with a light weapon, dealing an extra 1d6 
points of damage . At 4th level, the extra 
damage you deal increases to 2d6 . 
  The extra damage from the sur-
prise strike ability stacks with the 
extra damage from sneak attack 
whenever  both  would  apply  to 
the same target . 
  A target under the effect of 
your enchanting dance is con-
sidered  flat-footed  against  the 
attack .  Any  creature  that  is  not 
vulnerable  to  extra  damage  from 
sneak attacks is immune to this effect .
  This ability counts as sudden strike for the pur-
pose of meeting prerequisites or using ambush 
feats (page 71) . 
PlaYI  ng a Cloaked dan  Cer
You are the center of attention, the person everyone wants 
to talk to, the “face” of the party . Even if you aren’t the 
most attractive or charismatic member of your group, your 
unequaled skill at dance creates an irresistible appeal born 
of justified confidence and supernatural influence . You are 
more than just an eye-catching butterfly, though . Your mark 
rarely survives the encounter if you don’t want him to . 
Combat
You have two roles in combat: distracter and killer . When 
your group’s plan calls for a diversion, you shine . You draw 
the attention of opponents, allowing your allies to position 
themselves  for  their  most  devastating  attacks .  You  can 
perform this role near the front lines of battle, but you 
have a better chance of survival if you stay near the back . 
As the killer you move in close, drawing the enemy’s eye, 
and deliver one debilitating or deadly blow that turns the 
tide of battle .
   None of your enchanting dance ef-
fects can influence creatures immune 
to enchantments or mind-affecting 
abilities, so against those foes you’ll 
need to fall back on the abilities of your 
other class or classes .
advancement
An exquisite physical specimen, you drew the at-
tention of patrons and audiences as often with 
your unquestionable attractiveness as with 
your extraordinary artistic talents . Perhaps 
you sought to give your art a more practical 
use, or perhaps you grew disgusted with the 
unhidden lust of those who watched you, 
but eventually you brought together your 
love of dance with your martial abilities . 
   Since the first killing from your en-
chanting  dance—by  your  own  hand 
or that of a partner—you have grown 
steadily in both fame and noto-
riety    . You are beloved for your 
talents but feared for the death 
that  follows  you .  You  must 
walk  a  fine  line,  never  let-
ting the dread of the latter 
outweigh  the  appeal  of 
the former .
   Obviously,  you  must 
continue to max out your 
ranks in Perform (dance), 
but  don’t  forget  other  useful 
skills such as Bluff, Hide, and Diplo-
macy . The new ambush feats in Chapter 3 
present additional options for your surpris-
ing strike ability, particularly if you already have sneak 
attack or sudden strike from another class . Weapon Fi-
nesse  and  Weapon  Focus  greatly  enhance  a  mission’s 
chance of success . Interaction skill tricks are an excellent 
choice as well .
resources
You  rarely  work  alone,  yet  your  involvement  with  an 
organization is transitory at best . As your needs or whims 
dictate you flit from town to town, dance troupe to dance 
troupe, and are sought out by thieves and assassins’ guilds . 
For the short time you join such groups, you can rely on 
whatever resources they provide . Most of the time, however, 
you are on your own .
Mina Longacre,  
a cloaked dancer
Illus. by E. Widermann


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Cloaked dan  Cers In   The World
“She was a rare beauty: charming, graceful, talented. It’s too bad 
she killed the king.”
—Tessa Senchan, spellwarp sniper 
and royal guard officer
In any setting that includes assassins and bards, cloaked 
dancers slip comfortably into the space between the two . 
They can act as alternative assassins or as especially influ-
ential bards who focus on their love of dance . 
organization
Cloaked dancers typically work with trusted partners or 
small  groups,  making  them  well  suited  to  adventuring 
parties . In rare circumstances they work alone, but such 
cloaked dancers often have short careers . On entering a new 
town or city, a cloaked dancer who expects to stay for more 
than a few days usually joins a dance troupe or thieves’ guild 
(or both) . These alliances are rarely permanent, lasting just 
long enough to benefit both parties . A cloaked dancer who 
travels regularly between a small number of cities might 
have membership in several organizations but no loyalty 
to any of them .
nPC    reactions
Reactions to a known cloaked dancer vary widely . The 
nobility both prize and fear cloaked dancers, welcoming 
them cautiously, since having one perform brings much 
prestige but also the risk of death . Bodyguards and law 
enforcers  despise  them  for  the  murders  that  inevitably 
follow their performances . Common folk strain to catch 
glimpses of cloaked dancers, treating them with the awe 
and jealousy that accompany celebrity . 
Cloaked dan  Cer    lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (nobility and royalty) 
or Perform (dance) can research cloaked dancers to learn 
more about them . When a character succeeds on a skill 
check, the following lore is revealed, including the infor-
mation from lower DCs .
 DC 10: A cloaked dancer can charm watchers with her 
dance .
 DC 15: A cloaked dancer creates an effective diversion 
while her comrades rob or murder with ease .
 DC 20: A cloaked dancer can slide a dagger between 
your ribs and still leave you happy . 
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific cloaked dancers in 
your campaign, including a notable individual, the area 
in which she operates, and the kinds of performances in 
which she specializes . 
  Finding a cloaked dancer is rarely difficult if the PCs 
have a connection to the criminal underworld . A thieves’ 
guild can usually set up a meeting . If the PCs know of a 
specific cloaked dancer, they can also inquire of a dance 
troupe operating in that city .
Cloaked dan  Cers In   The gaMe
A cloaked dancer can be attractive to the player who enjoys 
the role of a specialized killer but does not want to play an 
evil character . For players who are interested more in social 
interaction than in assassination, the prestige class ensures 
that  they  are  the  center  of  attention  in  any  encounter 
involving intrigue and diplomacy .
  Introducing  cloaked  dancers  into  your  campaign 
should  not  be  difficult .  Famous  dancers  might  already 
exist, perhaps as part of a traveling show or as members of 
an exclusive school of dance—their extra talents can be 
revealed at an opportune time . 
adaptation
Cloaked  dancers  are  most  appropriate  for  campaigns 
that  focus  on  urban  adventures  and  social  encounters . 
In  campaigns  involving  large  combats,  exploration,  or 
dungeon delving, they are as out of place as songbirds on 
the  battlefield .  Against  intelligent  humanoid  enemies 
they can hold their own in any campaign, though, with 
abilities resembling those of enchanters and bards . If your 
campaign’s  main  antagonists  are  creatures  immune  to 
enchantments or mind-affecting abilities, such as undead, 
you might need to adjust the enchanting dance to affect 
such beings . Consider changing the entry requirements to 
include ranks in the Knowledge skill appropriate to that 
type of creature .
sample encounter
The PCs might meet a cloaked dancer at a social function, 
whether they are guests or guards . In either case, they might 
become involved if one spots the cloaked dancer’s weapon 
or realizes that she has allies in the crowd . Their attempt 
to thwart her can earn them the thanks of one group and 
the hatred of another .
 EL  10: Flighty and driven by whims, Mina Longacre 
is every bit the diva of her reputation . The PCs encounter 
Mina during one of her deadly performances, or in the 
frantic minutes after she concludes a dance and makes to 
flee   . Depending on how they feel about her intended target, 
the PCs might attempt to stop her or simply watch .
Mina Longacre CR 10
Female human bard 7/cloaked dancer 3
CN Medium humanoid 
Init +1; Senses Listen +0, Spot +0 
Languages	Common, Elven, Halfling
AC 13, touch 12, flat-footed 12; Dodge, Mobility
 (+1 Dex, +1 armor, +1 deflection)
hp 48 (10 HD) 
Fort +4, Ref +9, Will +6
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee	+1 human bane dagger +7/+2 (1d4/19–20) or 
 +9/+4 (1d4+2/19–20) against humans
Ranged +1 human bane dagger +9 (1d4/19–20) or
 +11 (1d4+2/19–20) against humans
Base	Atk	+7; Grp	+6
Atk	Options skill tricks, surprising strike +1d6


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Special	Actions bardic music 7/day (inspire courage +1, fasci-
nate 3 targets, countersong, suggestion), enchanting dance 
3/day (beguiling dance, wearying dance; DC 17) 
Combat	Gear panic button (escaping)*, 2 potions of cure light 
wounds
 *New item described in Chapter 5
Bard	Spells	Known (CL 8th):
 3rd (2/day)—dispel magic, slow (DC 17), create fetch*
2nd (4/day)—alter self, detect thoughts (DC 16), enthrall 
(DC 16), invisibility
1st (4/day)—charm person (DC 15), cure light wounds, 
lesser confusion (DC 15), sleep (DC 15)
0 (3/day)—detect magic, light, mage hand, mending, open/
close, prestidigitation
 *New spell described in Chapter 4
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 14, Wis 10, Cha 19
SQ bardic knowledge +9
Feats Chord of Distraction*, Dodge, Mobility, Quick Draw, 
Skill Focus (Perform [dance])
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Balance +3, Bluff +17, Concentration +10, Diplomacy 
+19, Disguise +4 (+6 acting), Gather Information +9, 
Hide +6, Intimidate +6, Jump +1, Knowledge (local) +14, 
Knowledge (nobility and royalty) +14, Listen +0, Perform 
(dance) +20, Sleight of Hand +16, Spot +0, Tumble +14, 
Use Rope +3
Skill	Tricks* Hidden Blade, Shrouded Dance, Social Recovery, 
Timely Misdirection
 *Described in Chapter 3
Possessions	combat gear plus +1 human bane dagger, bracers 
of armor +1, cloak of Charisma +2, ring of protection +1
Co  Mba T TraPsMITh
“Go on ahead. I’ve got a surprise for those guys.”
—Alexan, combat trapsmith
Combat  trapsmiths  can  litter  a  battlefield  or  dungeon 
with  devices  of  their  own  cunning  design .  They  can 
put together a variety of traps, ranging from annoying 
to deadly, in mere seconds . With a bit of preparation, a 
combat trapsmith can turn a difficult battle into an easy 
exercise or vice versa .
beCoMI  ng a CoMba  T TraPsMITh
Rogues  and  scouts  make  up  the  majority  of  combat 
trapsmiths, with ninjas and multiclass rangers forming 
the bulk of the rest . These four classes rely most often on 
traps and (except for the ranger) are also the best able to 
find and disarm them . 
Entry Requirements
Skills: Craft (trapmaking) 8 ranks, Disable Device 6 ranks, 
Search 6 ranks.
Special: Trapfinding.
Class fea Tures
The combat trapsmith takes trapmaking to new heights, 
rapidly  installing  temporary  devices  for  use  on  the 
battlefield .
 Combat Trapping (Ex): You know how to create combat 
traps to aid your allies . At 1st level, you can learn two traps 
from the list in Table 2–6: Combat Traps, provided you 
meet the prerequisites . At each level thereafter, you add 
one additional trap to your repertoire, to a maximum of 
six traps known . Whenever you attain a new level in this 
class, you can choose to replace any one previously learned 
trap with a new trap .
  A combat trap is triggered by any Tiny or larger creature 
entering the trapped square . Flying or incorporeal crea-
tures don’t trigger combat traps . You can build a combat 
trap only on solid ground—you can’t place it on a wall or 
ceiling, in the air, or floating in the water . A combat trap 
functions only once . Once set, it lasts for 1 hour or until 
triggered, whichever comes first . 
  Crafting  a  combat  trap  requires  a  full-round  action 
(which  provokes  attacks  of  opportunity)  and  a  Craft 
(trapmaking) check . Each trap’s entry lists the required 
Craft check DC . If the check is successful, you can place 
the trap in any square adjacent to your space . A failed 
check means that the action and materials are wasted to 
no effect, but you can try to set the same trap again later .
  Some combat traps allow a saving throw, as noted in a 
trap’s entry . The save DC is 10 + your combat trapsmith 
level + your Int modifier . Locating or disabling a combat 
trap requires a successful Search or Disable Device check 
with a DC equal to 20 + your combat trapsmith level + your 
Int modifier . You can automatically find and disable your 
own combat traps . Because a combat trap is built quickly 
and crudely, it is also possible to discern with a successful 
Spot check (using the same DC as given above), whether 
or not the observer has the trapfinding class feature . All 
combat traps produce extraordinary effects, so dispel magic 
or spell resistance cannot interfere with them .
  Unless otherwise noted, an ongoing effect from a combat 
trap lasts for a number of rounds equal to your combat 
trapsmith level . Multiple effects from the same kind of 
combat trap don’t stack; use only the longer duration .
Table 2–5: The Combat Trapsmith Hit Die: d6
	Base					Combat
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will	    	Traps
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Known
1st +0 +2 +2 +0 Combat trapping, 2
     trap sense +1 
2nd +1 +3 +3 +0 Skill Focus (Craft  3
     [trapmaking]) 
3rd +2 +3 +3 +1 Trap sense +2 4
4th +3 +4 +4 +1 Improvised  5
     materials 
5th +3 +4 +4 +1 Expert trapsetter,  6
     trap sense +3
Class	Skills	(6	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Appraise, Balance, 
Climb, Concentration, Craft, Disable Device, Escape Artist, 
Hide, Jump, Knowledge (architecture and engineering), 
Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Profession, Search, Spot, 
Tumble, Use Rope.


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
  Creating combat traps requires a special kit containing 
raw materials and tools . A combat trapsmith’s kit costs 100 
gp, weighs 10 pounds, and provides components sufficient 
to create ten traps . A combat trap can’t be cannibalized for 
raw materials, nor can its materials be retrieved if the trap 
isn’t triggered .
 Trap  Sense  (Ex): Beginning at 1st level, you become 
more adept at evading the effects of traps . See the barbar-
ian class feature, PH 26  . If you already have trap sense, this 
class feature provides no additional benefit .
 Skill Focus: At 2nd level, you gain Skill Focus (Craft 
[trapmaking]) as a bonus feat . If you already have this feat, 
you can instead select any other feat for which you meet 
the prerequisite .
 Improvised  Materials  (Ex): Beginning at 4th level, 
you can craft combat traps from raw materials at hand 
instead of relying on your combat trapsmith’s kit . Doing 
so increases the Craft (trapmaking) check DC by 5 but 
otherwise has no effect on the trap’s potency .
 Expert  Trapsetter  (Ex):  At  5th  level,  you  can  set  a 
combat trap as a standard action without provoking attacks 
of opportunity .
Combat Trap descriptions
Entering the trapped square produces the stated effect .
 Befuddler: A pungent spray applies a –2 penalty on 
Concentration checks, as well as ability checks and skill 
checks  based  on  Intelligence,  Wisdom,  and  Charisma 
(Will negates) .
 Enfeebler: A puff of acrid powder renders the target 
fatigued (Fortitude negates) .
 Entangler: A hidden cord loops around the target, hold-
ing it in place as a tanglefoot bag does . A successful Reflex 
save negates the effect; alternatively, a DC 20 Strength or 
Escape Artist check (made as a full-round action) allows 
the stuck creature to break free .
 Equalizer:  The  first  creature  entering  the  trapped 
square must succeed on a Reflex save or fall prone . The 
trap reputedly gets its name from its gnome inventor, who 
used it to bring taller foes down to his level .
 Flashbang: The trapped square emits a blinding burst 
of light accompanied by a loud thunderclap . Any creature 
in  the  trapped  square  or  any  adjacent  square  becomes 
blinded and deafened; a successful Fortitude save lessens 
the effect to dazzled .
 Footspiker: This trap effectively fills the designated 
square  with  caltrops,  potentially  slowing  the  target’s 
movement (PH 126)    .
 Glitterburst: A fine cloud of silver dust clings to any 
creature within the trapped square (no save) . Any creature 
affected by a glitterburst trap takes a –20 penalty on Hide 
checks and, if invisible, is visibly outlined for the duration 
of the effect .
 Scorcher: The trapped square releases a cloud of fine 
dust followed by a spark, setting off a small explosion that 
deals 2d6 points of fire damage to each creature in that 
square (Reflex half) .
 Scorcher, Great: This works like a scorcher trap (see 
above), except that it deals 5d6 points of fire damage to each 
creature in the trapped square and in all adjacent squares 
(Reflex half) .
 Sleeper: A slumber-inducing vapor makes the target 
fall asleep . A successful Fortitude save lessens the effect 
to fatigued .
 Spiderweb: The trapped square releases a burst of sticky 
tendrils that toughen when they contact air . This trap 
duplicates the effect of a web spell, except that the strands 
fill only the trapped square and all adjacent squares .
 Stinkburst: A cloud of noxious vapors duplicates the 
effect of a stinking cloud spell, except that the effect fills 
only  the  trapped  square .  A  successful  Fortitude  save 
negates the effect, but a creature must make a new saving 
throw each round it remains within the cloud .
PlaYI  ng a CoMba  T TraPsMITh
From an early age you were fascinated by all aspects of 
traps, from their elegant engineering to their ingenious 
lethality . Perhaps you fell victim to a particularly innova-
tive  device,  or  witnessed  the  effectiveness  of  one .  You 
might have had a teacher, but just as likely you learned 
from studying the mechanisms of sprung or disabled traps . 
You have dedicated yourself to the ultimate expression of 
the trapmaker’s craft . 
  Preparation and care are the keys to your survival . You 
have great respect for traps and what they can do, so you 
never rush headlong into anyplace new and unfamiliar . 
Table 2–6: Combat Traps
Trap	Name	
(Craft	DC)	Prerequisites	Effect
Befuddler (15) — –2 penalty on 
  Concentration, 
  Int-, Wis-, Cha-
  based checks
Enfeebler (15) Craft (alchemy) 1 rank    Fatigues target
Entangler (17) Class level 2nd Entangles target
Equalizer (17) Class level 2nd Target falls 
  prone
Flashbang (19) Craft (alchemy) 3  Blinds and
 ranks, class level 3rd  deafens target
Footspiker (15) — Halves target’s 
  speed
Glitterburst (15) Craft (alchemy) 1 rank    Makes invisible 
  target visible
Scorcher (15) Craft (alchemy) 1 rank    Deals 2d6 fire 
  damage
Scorcher,  Craft (alchemy) 5  Deals 5d6 fire
   great (23)  ranks, class level 5th damage in
  larger area
Sleeper (21) Craft (alchemy) 4  Target falls 
 ranks, class level 4th  asleep
Spiderweb (19) Craft (alchemy) 3  Web fills small 
 ranks, class level 3rd  area
Stinkburst (21) Craft (alchemy) 4  Stinking cloud 
 ranks, class level 4th fills trapped 
  square


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Your role in the party depends on its needs: You might take 
point, searching for the handiwork of other trapmakers, 
or follow up the rear, rigging nasty surprises to cover the 
group’s withdrawal . In either case you take your respon-
sibility, like everything else in life, very seriously . 
Combat
You can hold your own in combat, thanks to the training 
you received before becoming a combat trapsmith, but you 
should stay out of melee as long as you can . Try not to draw 
attention to yourself while “enhancing” the battlefield with 
your special creations . Only after you’ve given yourself and 
your party the edge with your expert skills should you get 
involved in the fight .
advancement
Even though you have reached a high degree of pro-
ficiency, you must continue to hone 
your craft . Max out your ranks in 
Craft  (trapmaking),  as  well  as  in 
Disable Device and Search . If you 
have the skill points to spare, consid-
er investing in Knowledge (architecture 
and engineering) or Knowledge (dun-
geoneering), if your journeys take you 
into appropriate environments . Choose 
feats that help you keep out of enemies’ 
reach, or that let you move eas-
ily around the battlefield, such 
as Dodge (and related feats), 
Improved Initiative, and Dash 
(from Complete Warrior) . Luck 
feats (page 72) are useful for 
those times when even your 
impressive skills fail you .
  Taking  a  level  in  a  spell-
casting class (likely wizard, 
with  your  high  Intelli-
gence)  can  be  a  smart 
choice .  Having  even  a 
few extra magical tricks 
up your sleeve gives you 
an edge against foes who 
think they know all your 
secrets .
resources
Popular with thieves’ guilds, hunt-
ing lodges, and nobles looking for added 
protection, you never want for work or oppor-
tunity . Whether employed by an organization 
or an individual, you can name your own price—and only 
the wealthy can afford you .
  You can expect to receive assistance from an employer 
to help you do what you do best, usually in the form of 
extra combat trapsmith’s kits . The amount of aid depends 
on  your  employer’s  wealth  and  needs,  as  well  as  the 
project for which you were hired . When not employed 
or when plying your trade on the side, you expect and 
require no support—you can manage quite well on your 
own    .
Co  Mba  T TraPsMIThs  
In   The World
“We spent the day in town shopping. By the time we returned, 
he’d rigged our rooms top to bottom!”
—Elibor Gunter, battle trickster and friend of Alexan
Combat trapsmiths turn traps from elaborate set 
pieces  into  tactical  battlefield  additions,  but 
otherwise don’t have much overall impact on 
the world . Thus, you can easily incorporate a 
combat trapsmith into a campaign . For ex-
ample, if the party raids the headquarters 
of a thieves’ guild but cannot complete 
the mission, place a combat trapsmith 
among the surviving guild members . 
Even as the PCs try to make their es-
cape, they might fall victim to devilish 
traps in previously cleared hallways 
and rooms .
organization
Each combat trapsmith comes to his 
trade in his own way . No guild or 
organization links these staunch 
individualists,  who  freely  join 
or leave an employer as their in-
terests  and  values  dictate .  A 
combat  trapsmith  joins  a 
larger group only if doing 
so makes sense to him; an-
other might reject the same 
organization as offending 
his ideals or technical sen-
sibilities . A group honored 
by the company of such 
an insidious and deadly 
specialist treats him with 
honor and respect .
nPC reactions
The  combat  trapsmith’s 
trade is of questionable legal-
ity  in  some  places,  and  highly 
illicit in others . Those who care about such 
things and who know a character to be a combat trapsmith 
treat him with scorn, usually having an initial reaction 
of indifferent at best . Dwarves, gnomes, and others who 
appreciate skilled craftsmanship look upon his abilities 
Alexan,  
a combat trapsmith
Illus. by K. Yanner


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
with a bit of awe, and are usually at least friendly to a 
combat trapsmith . 
Co  Mba  T TraPsMITh   lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can research 
combat trapsmiths to learn more about them . When a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Combat trapsmiths are equally skilled at creat-
ing and disabling nasty traps .
 DC 15: A skilled combat trapsmith can whip up a trap 
in a few moments that might take an ordinary person 
hours or days .
 DC 20: Some combat trapsmiths can make traps seem-
ingly out of almost nothing . 
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific combat trapsmiths 
in your campaign, including a notable individual, the area 
in which he operates, and the kinds of traps in which he 
specializes .
  Members of a local thieves’ guild always know who the 
combat trapsmiths are within their city, even if none are 
currently working for the guild . PCs wishing to meet a 
specific combat trapsmith should contact his employer 
(if he has one) or the guildmaster . This information never 
comes cheap .
Co  Mba  T TraPsMIThs  
In   The gaMe
Combat trapsmiths work best in campaigns set within 
an  urban  environment,  particularly  if  the  PCs  have  a 
home base to protect . Some wilderness-based campaigns 
might also provide enough opportunities to keep combat 
trapsmiths  busy .  Players  who  enjoy  establishing  and 
protecting a home base for their characters, or who are 
looking for a new direction for their rogues, might enjoy 
playing combat trapsmiths . Engineering-focused dwarves 
and gnomes find the class especially appealing .
  Even  a  single  combat  trapsmith  NPC  can  make  an 
interesting series of encounters, harassing the PCs with 
infuriating new traps in areas they thought were clear . 
The party faces a substantial challenge in tracking down 
and putting a stop to the interference, especially if the 
combat trapsmith has an influential employer .
adaptation
The combat trapsmith prestige class requires no special 
rules sets and can fit into any campaign . Additional trap 
effects are easy to design, following the trapmaking guide-
lines in the Dungeon Master’s Guide and the examples in the 
above list . For a stronger magical theme, consider adding 
a level of spellcaster to the prerequisite and expanding the 
range of traps to encompass low-level spell-like effects 
(such as hypnotism, daze monster, shatter, or cause fear) .
sample encounter
Alexan  was  assigned  to  a  group  of  irregulars  during  a 
recent war . Having grown up as a hunter and trapper, 
he attempted to put his snare-laying experience to use 
against the enemy but worked too slowly for the hit-and-
run tactics of his brigade . After the war, Alexan honed 
his craft until he could set up a trap in a fraction of his 
previous best time .
 EL  11: The PCs most likely encounter Alexan in the 
wilds admiring his latest creation . Although no longer 
a soldier, he still enjoys setting up traps against roughly 
human-sized creatures . He usually takes down his traps 
shortly after installing them, having no desire to cause the 
accidental death of a forester or traveler . The PCs might 
locate one of his traps and be impressed by its ingenuity, 
or  they  might  dismantle  it  to  prevent  the  hazard,  not 
understanding Alexan’s intent .
Alexan CR 11
Male human scout 9/combat trapsmith 2
N Medium humanoid 
Init +4; Senses Listen +12, Spot +14
Languages Common, Elven
AC 19, touch 14, flat-footed 19; Dodge, Mobility, uncanny 
dodge
 (+3 Dex, +5 armor, +1 deflection)
hp 73 (11 HD) 
Resist evasion
Fort +9, Ref +14, Will +3; trap sense +1
Speed 45 ft. (9 squares); Shot on the Run
Melee +1 longsword +10/+5 (1d8+3/19–20)
Ranged	+2 composite longbow +12/+7 (1d8+4/×3)
Base	Atk	+7; Grp	+9
Atk	Options Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, skirmish (+3d6, 
+2 AC)
Special	Actions combat trapping (enfeebler, footspiker, 
scorcher; DC 13)
Combat	Gear 2 potions of cure moderate wounds
Abilities	Str 14, Dex 16, Con 14, Int 12, Wis 10, Cha 8
SQ battle fortitude +1, camouflage (use Hide in terrain that 
doesn’t grant cover or concealment), flawless stride, track-
less step, trap sense +1, trapfinding
Feats	Dash*, Dodge, Lightning Reflexes
B
, Mobility
B
, Point 
Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Shot on the Run, Skill Focus 
(Craft [trapmaking])
B
 *Feat described in Complete Warrior
Skills Appraise (alchemy, traps) +3, Balance +19, Craft 
(alchemy) +13, Craft (trapmaking) +18, Disable Device 
+17, Hide +17, Jump +8, Listen +12, Move Silently +17, 
Search +15, Spot +14, Survival +0 (+2 following tracks), 
Tumble +17 
Possessions combat gear plus +3 leather armor, +1 longsword, 
+2 composite longbow (+2 Str bonus) with 60 arrows, 
ring of protection +1, combat trapsmith’s kit, masterwork 
thieves’ tools
Battle	Fortitude	(Ex)	Bonus on initiative checks and Fortitude 
saves while wearing light or no armor and carrying a light 
load. Included above. Complete Adventurer 12.
Flawless	Stride	(Ex)	Alexan ignores movement penalties from 
any sort of hindering terrain. Complete Adventurer	13.


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
for  Tune’s frI  end
“Don’t worry about it. I have a feeling our luck is about to change.”
—Sar Pios, layabout and fortune’s friend
The fortune’s friend lives by his luck . He doesn’t worry 
about much of anything, including where his next meal 
comes from, and trusts to luck—perhaps more than he 
should . 
beCoMI  ng a for  Tune’s fr Iend
Clerics of Olidammara, monks, and rogues qualify most 
easily for this prestige class and make up the largest group 
within it, though every class finds representation . To adopt 
the  ways  of  the  fortune’s  friend,  a  character  need  only 
embrace his luck . 
Entry Requirements
Base	Attack	Bonus: +3. 
Skills: Any skill 8 ranks.
Feats: Any luck feat.
Class fea Tures
A fortune’s friend survives by and trusts to his luck . 
 Spellcasting: At each even-numbered level, you gain 
new spells per day and an increase in caster level (and spells 
known, if applicable) as if you had also gained a level in a 
spellcasting class to which you belonged before adding the 
prestige class level . You do not, however, gain any other 
benefit a character of that class would have gained . If you 
had more than one spellcasting class before becoming a 
fortune’s friend, you must decide to which class to add each 
level for the purpose of determining spells per day, caster 
level, and spells known .
 Easy  Luck  (Ex):  Luck  comes  to  you  naturally .  The 
swift or immediate action to use a luck feat (page 72) does 
not count against your limit of one swift action per turn . 
However, you still can’t expend a luck reroll more than 
once per turn to influence the same result . 
 Extra Fortune (Ex): At each odd-numbered level, you 
gain one extra luck reroll per day . This reroll is in addition 
to those granted by luck feats .
 More  Luck  than  Skill  (Ex): Even if you have some 
talent in a particular area, you still depend on your luck to 
see you through . Once per day as a swift action, you can 
add your class level as a luck bonus on all skill checks you 
make until the start of your next turn . 
 Bonus Luck Feat: At 2nd and 4th level, you gain a bonus 
luck feat for which you meet the prerequisite . See page 75 
for a complete list of luck feats .
 Fortune’s Favorite (Ex): By 3rd level, you have learned to 
rely on your luck to stay alive . Once per day as an immediate 
action, you can add your class level as a luck bonus on all 
saving throws you make until the start of your next turn .
 Lucky  Strike  (Ex): Even the greatest warriors, those 
who train and drill constantly, occasionally win through 
sheer luck, so why shouldn’t you? Beginning at 5th level, 
once per day as a swift action, you can add your class level 
as a luck bonus on all attack rolls you make until the start 
of your next turn .
PlaYI  ng a for  Tune’s fr Iend
Who needs skill? You’ve got luck on your side! Even in the 
heat of battle, when your very life is at stake, you remain 
calm and cheerful, confident that something will give you 
and your comrades the upper hand . Your carefree attitude 
is uplifting to some and grating to others . To the latter 
you say, “Sour grapes!” They are envious of your ability to 
slide through life without a care, easily finding food, gold, 
lodging, and love . In your rare contemplative moments, 
you feel sorry for those who have to work so hard to make 
ends meet . 
Combat
As a fortune’s friend, you are an unusual combatant, often 
jumping in over your head and relying on luck to get you 
out of a jam . Your talent isn’t a license to be stupid, though . 
You’re  lucky,  not  invulnerable,  and  your  good  fortune 
doesn’t necessarily protect your allies .
advancement
You don’t become a fortune’s friend so much as realize 
you’ve  always  been  one .  From  your  earliest  days,  good 
things happened to you, and others would comment on 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
The greaT e  sCaP  e
“It  wasn’t  easy,  y’know?  First  I  had  to  get  past  them  bars,  see. 
Inch-thick steel! How ya gonna get through that without magic?
    “Well, I got me a connection on the outside. Someone who 
wants to see me get outta there right quick. So I receives a little 
present: a loaf o’ fresh bread in a wood box. Now the warden, 
he’s  pretty  smart  for  a  bugbear,  so  he  cuts  up  the  bread  into 
little  slices  to  check  for  hidden  shivs  and  files.  He  don’t  find 
none, so he lets me have the bread. The fool lets me have the 
box, too—for a few minutes while I’m eatin’ the bread, anyway. 
He watches me the whole time, so I takes my time chewin’ the 
bread  and  eyein’  that  box.  Then  I  seen  it—in  the  grain  o’  the 
wood is a long sliver o’ metal. 
    “I  hide  my  hand  behind  the  loaf  and  even  give  the  warden 
a piece. He ain’t no fool, like I said, so he takes it but doesn’t 
eat  it  right  way.  But  I’s  pickin’  at  that  sliver  with  my  hidden 
hand.  By  the  time  I  finish  the  bread  I  got  me  a  wee  blade  o’ 
adamantine. 
 “So I sets to work on the bars that night, sawin’ away with that 
little sliver. I only gotta cut out two bars to get out, and I finish 
up just before dawn. All sneaky-like I slips out the window, takin’ 
the sawed-off bars with me fer weapons. But I didn’t need ’em. 
I kept runnin’ ’til noon and ain’t been back since.”


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
how lucky you were . As you grew older you trusted more 
and more to your luck, and it never let you down . Eventu-
ally you forswore practice and discipline, relying entirely 
on your luck to get by . On that day you truly became a 
fortune’s friend .
  You pick up bits of know-how here and there, which 
translate into a smattering of skills: some generally useful 
(such as Spot) and some of narrower utility (such as Use 
Rope) . Having a varied repertoire of skills comes 
in handy, even if you don’t practice them often . Of 
course, you can’t go wrong selecting even more luck 
feats    . Each one not only gives you a new avenue of 
luck to explore, but another crucial luck reroll .
resources
As in everything else, you’ve been fortunate in finding 
the right people to know . Many enjoy your company 
and marvel at your incredible string of luck . However, 
since most people secretly envy your good fortune, 
these contacts are at best helpful acquaintances . 
Most such so-called friends are quick to aban-
don you when the going gets tough . For the 
most part, your luck is all you have . 
for  Tune’s fr Iends  
In   The World
“I used to want to be that guy. Good things 
always seem to happen to him. But you know 
what? That life is too unpredictable even 
for me, never knowing where your next 
meal is going to come from.”
—Dram Cicaeda, 
man on the street
Individualistic  and  free-wheeling, 
fortune’s  friends  fit  easily  into  any 
campaign that uses the luck rules . 
organization
Though a fortune’s friend belongs to 
no one but himself, he seeks out com-
panionship wherever he can find it . He 
isn’t picky about his comrades, as long 
as they aren’t judgmental about him . 
This arrangement does not always work out well, however . 
Some who recognize his abilities keep a fortune’s friend 
around simply as a good-luck charm . More unscrupulous 
groups take advantage of his good fortune, making him 
the fall guy for their crimes or sending him on suicide 
missions . 
nPC    reactions
A fortune’s friend doesn’t consider himself lazy: He works 
just hard enough for his luck to carry him the rest of the 
Table 2–7: The Fortune’s Friend  Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Spellcasting
1st +0 +0 +2 +0 Easy luck, extra fortune, more luck than skill —
2nd +1 +0 +3 +0 Bonus luck feat +1 level of existing spellcasting class
3rd +1 +1 +3 +1 Extra fortune, fortune’s favorite —
4th +2 +1 +4 +1 Bonus luck feat +1 level of existing spellcasting class
5th +2 +1 +4 +1 Extra fortune, lucky strike —
Class	Skills	(6	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Balance, Bluff, Climb, Craft, Decipher Script, Diplomacy, Disable Device, Disguise, 
Escape Artist, Gather Information, Hide, Jump, Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Perform, Profession, Search, Sleight of 
Hand, Spot, Swim, Tumble, Use Magic Device, Use Rope.
Sar Pios,  
a fortune’s friend
Illus. by C. Frank

0
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
way   . This apparent tendency toward laziness causes many 
people to turn against a fortune’s friend .
  Dwarves in particular despise those who benefit without 
hard work . A dwarf who recognizes a fortune’s friend has 
an initial unfriendly attitude toward him, and Diplomacy 
checks to influence that attitude have a –10 penalty . Even 
the luckiest fortune’s friend is unlikely to convince a dwarf 
to be helpful toward him . Other characters treat a fortune’s 
friend with a mixture of envy and awe . Most are neutral 
overall: They appreciate his abilities but resent his easy life . 
Two fortune’s friends, should they meet, repel one another 
like similar magnetic poles .
for  Tune’s fr Iend lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana) or Knowl-
edge (local) can research fortune’s friends to learn more 
about them . When a character succeeds on a skill check, 
the following lore is revealed, including the information 
from lower DCs .
 DC 10: A fortune’s friend is lucky . Almost too lucky .
 DC 15:  A  fortune’s  friend  lives  by  luck  alone .  Noth-
ing  ever  seems  to  get  him  down  because—for  him  at 
least—everything works out in the end .
 DC 20: A fortune’s friend can sometimes cheat death .
  PCs rarely go looking for a fortune’s friend . A meeting 
just happens, as long as that would be lucky for him .
for  Tune’s fr Iends In   The gaMe
Fortune’s friends can be fascinating if frustrating antago-
nists, but they work better as allies, cohorts, or minions 
of more powerful foes . They make great comedic foils, 
bringing their brash personalities to bear against the PCs 
in over-the-top, melodramatic ways .
  Players who like to have some control over their char-
acters’  luck  should  enjoy  this  prestige  class,  which  can 
work easily with any character type . It might also appeal 
to those playing clerics or worshipers of a deity of fortune, 
particularly if they have access to the Luck domain . One 
fortune’s friend can join a party without endangering the 
overall scheme of things .
adaptation
A  fortune’s  friend  fits  easily  into  almost  any  campaign 
world . You can customize the prestige class by specifying 
his source of luck as a deity: Olidammara in the core setting, 
Tymora in Faerûn, the Traveler in the world of Eberron, or 
an equivalent deity of your campaign . To strengthen this 
divine theme, you could adjust the entry requirements to 
include 4 ranks in Knowledge (religion) and perhaps being 
a worshiper of the appropriate deity .
sample encounter
A fortune’s friend doesn’t stand out in a crowd, unless his 
incredible luck is on display . Some fortune’s friends supple-
ment their income with petty larceny, though if their luck 
fails, they might end up in jail for a while .
 EL 8: Sar Pios’s luck hasn’t really been with him the past 
few days, and he’s starting to get hungry . In order to survive 
until his luck changes, he has gone back to picking pockets . 
This time, though, he’s been caught with his hand in the 
cookie jar—or rather, a PC’s coin purse .
Sar Pios CR 8
Male human fighter 2/rogue 3/fortune’s friend 3 
CN Medium humanoid 
Init +3, Lucky Start; Senses Listen +11, Spot +11 
Language	Common
AC 15, touch 13, flat-footed 12; Dodge, Mobility
 (+3 Dex, +2 armor)
hp 50 (8 HD) 
Resist evasion
Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +4
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares); Spring Attack
Melee	mwk dagger +7 (1d4+1/19–20) 
Ranged mwk dagger +9 (1d4+1/19–20)
Base	Atk	+5; Grp	+6
Atk	Options Fortuitous Strike, luck reroll 6/day
Special	Actions fortune’s favorite (+3 saves), more luck than 
skill (+3 skill checks), sneak attack +3d6
Combat	Gear 2 potions of cure light wounds
Abilities	Str 12, Dex 16, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8
SQ trap sense +1, trapfinding
Feats Advantageous Avoidance
B
*, Dodge
B
, Fortuitous Strike*, 
Mobility
B
, Lucky Catch*, Lucky Start
B
*, Spring Attack
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Balance +5, Climb +12, Hide +9, Intimidate +4, Jump 
+12, Listen +11, Move Silently +9, Sleight of Hand +4, Spot 
+11, Tumble +12
Possessions	combat gear plus leather armor, 2 masterwork 
daggers, gray bag of tricks, deck of illusions
gra  Y guard
“Does your stout armor give you peace of mind? Does your holy 
sword help you sleep at night? Mine do not.”
—Ambros Brasmere, gray guard
The typical image of a paladin is a proud knight of noble 
bearing,  resplendent  in  armor  bright  as  sunlight  and 
bearing a sword shining with the purity of his cause . This 
archetype,  upheld  by  both  idealistic  knights  and  their 
enemies, has killed countless honorable warriors . Taking 
a cue from the enemies of their faith, many good-aligned 
religions  have  established  secretive  orders  of  the  most 
dedicated and hardened soldiers . These gray guards are 
less restrained by their knightly vows, doing what must 
be done, no matter how unpleasant .
beCoMI  ng a gra  Y guard
Only the most realistic and battleworn paladins become 
gray guards . They know the cruelties of the world cannot be 
expunged merely by good example and kind words . Though 
no less virtuous than other paladins, they join the order’s 
bloodstained ranks out of a sense of necessity . Those who 
seek membership merely because they resent the yoke of 
their code of conduct are unfit to be gray guards or paladins; 

1
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
such weak-willed individuals are swiftly excommunicated 
from both orders . 
  Gray guards most commonly follow deities concerned 
with justice, such as Heironeous, Tyr, or St . Cuthbert . 
Entry Requirements
Alignment: Lawful good.
Skills:	Knowledge (religion) 8 ranks, Sense Motive 4 ranks.
Special: Lay on hands class feature. 
Special: Must adhere to a code of conduct that prevents the 
character from performing evil acts.
Class fea Tures
You do what needs to be done for the betterment of your 
cause . Your freedom to act increases as you progress in 
level, letting you deal with evil as few pure paladins can, 
yet at the same time attracting the suspicion of those you 
are sworn to aid and protect . 
 Spellcasting: At each even-numbered level, you gain 
new spells per day and an increase in caster level (and spells 
known, if applicable) as if you had also gained a level in a 
divine  spellcasting  class  to  which  you  belonged  before 
adding the prestige class level . You do not, however, gain 
any other benefit a character of that class would have gained . 
If you had more than one divine spellcasting class before 
becoming a gray guard, you must decide to which class to 
add each level for the purpose of determining spells per 
day, caster level, and spells known .
 Sacrament of Trust: Upon entering this prestige class, 
you  take  a  vow  of  allegiance  to  your  faith  beyond  that 
of any ordinary paladin . This vow grants you a measure 
of freedom to act on your cause’s behalf without fear of 
retribution should your duties require you to break your 
code of conduct . Dishonorable acts still cause you to lose 
both gray guard and paladin class features until you atone, 
but this infraction is considered much less severe than it 
would be for a paladin .
  Thus, whenever you seek to atone for deeds that you 
willingly commit in the name of your faith but that break 
your code of conduct, a cleric casting an atonement spell 
on your behalf does not expend 500 XP as is normally 
required . This reprieve applies only to acts intended to 
further the cause of righteousness and the gray guard’s 
faith . No XP cost applies to a gray guard atoning after 
beating a confession from a heretic, for example, but 
the cost would have to be paid for one who started a bar-
room brawl .
 Lay on Hands (Su): This ability is identical to the pala-
din class feature of the same name (PH 44)   . Levels of gray 
guard stack with other class levels that grant lay on hands 
to determine the ability’s total healing capacity .
 Debilitating  Touch  (Su): At  2nd  level,  you  learn  to 
channel your lay on hands ability into a painful touch 
attack . Many gray guards use debilitating touch during 
interrogation, since it reduces the target’s ability to success-
fully bluff or resist magical effects . Using debilitating touch 
does not provoke attacks of opportunity . An opponent hit 
by this attack is sickened for 5 rounds . Using this ability 
costs 5 points of your daily healing allotment . A successful 
Fortitude save (DC 10 + your gray guard level + your Cha 
modifier) negates the effect . 
 Smite Evil (Su): Beginning at 3rd level, you can smite 
evil once per day . See the paladin class feature (PH 44)   . At 
8th level, you can smite evil one additional time per day . 
Levels of other classes that grant the smite evil class feature 
stack for the purpose of determining the extra damage 
dealt . For example, a 5th-level paladin/5th-level gray guard 
delivering a smite evil attack adds 10 points of damage to 
the attack .
 Justice Blade (Su): By 4th level, you have learned that 
suffering and injustice are not the exclusive province of 
evil    . You can use your smite evil ability to instead punish 
creatures of chaotic alignment . Using this ability expends 
one daily use of your smite evil class feature and works 
identically in all other ways, but its effect applies only to 
chaotic targets . Whenever you choose to smite an opponent, 
you  must  declare  whether  you  are  using  this  ability  to 
smite evil or chaos . If you accidentally smite a creature of 
an alignment other than that declared, the smite has no 
effect but the ability is still used up .
Table 2–8: The Gray Guard Hit Die: d10
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	Special	Spellcasting
1st +1 +2 +0 +2 Sacrament of trust, lay on hands —
2nd +2 +3 +0 +3 Debilitating touch +1 level of existing divine spellcasting class
3rd +3 +3 +1 +3 Smite evil 1/day —
4th +4 +4 +1 +4 Justice blade (chaos) +1 level of existing divine spellcasting class
5th +5 +4 +1 +4 Devastating touch —
6th +6 +5 +2 +5 — +1 level of existing divine spellcasting class
7th +7 +5 +2 +5 Unbound justice —
8th +8 +6 +2 +6 Smite evil 2/day +1 level of existing divine spellcasting class
9th +9 +6 +3 +6 Justice blade (all alignments) —
10th +10 +7 +3 +7 Sacrament of the true faith +1 level of existing divine spellcasting class
Class	Skills	(2	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Bluff, Concentration, Disguise, Forgery, Handle Animal, Heal, Intimidate, Knowledge 
(local), Knowledge (nobility and royalty), Knowledge (religion), Ride, Sense Motive.

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
  Beginning at 9th level, you can use justice blade to smite 
creatures of any alignment . You need not declare an align-
ment before making the smite attack, although if the attack 
misses, that use of smite is still used up for the day . 
 Devastating  Touch  (Su): When you attain 5th level, 
your deity shows its approval of your grim work . From this 
point on, you can use your lay on hands ability to make a 
touch attack that harms your enemies . Using devastating 
touch does not provoke attacks of opportunity . You decide 
how many points of your daily healing allotment to expend 
after successfully touching a  creature:  Each 
point  expended  deals 
1 point of damage to 
the target . A non-
evil  creature 
is   allowed 
a  Will  save 
(DC   10  +  your 
gray guard level 
+ your Cha mod-
ifier)  to  halve 
the  amount  of 
da mage dealt .
 Unbound Jus-
tice  (Ex): At  7th 
level,  unrestricted 
by your code of hon-
or, you can employ 
unorthodox  meth-
ods  that  are  all  the 
more effective because 
they’re unexpected . You 
add half your gray guard 
level (round down) as a 
competence  bonus  on 
Bluff,  Disguise,  and  In-
timidate skill checks . 
 Sacrament of the True Faith: 
At 10th level, you gain your order’s 
full  confidence .  You  are  granted  the 
freedom to act on behalf of your faith 
as you deem necessary . Thus, you never risk losing your 
class abilities in the pursuit of a just cause and never need 
to atone for violating your code of conduct .
  This  trust  does  not  grant  you  the  freedom  to  act  as 
violently  or  immorally  as  you  wish,  however .  Release 
from your code of conduct depends on your acting as an 
exemplar of your order’s ideals . If you violate this trust by 
habitually acting in an immoral or corrupt manner, the 
leaders or deity of your faith might revoke their blessing 
and banish you from the ranks of the faithful (see Ex-Gray 
Guards, below) . 
 Code of Conduct: As a gray guard, you are held to the 
same code of conduct as a paladin . You must be of lawful 
good alignment and must never willingly commit an evil 
act   . You must also pledge to respect legitimate authority, act 
with honor (not lying, cheating, using poison, and the like), 
aid the needy, and punish those who harm the innocent . If 
you contravene your code of conduct, you must atone for 
the transgression or lose all class abilities from both gray 
guard and paladin levels . As you advance in the prestige 
class, this code becomes more flexible . However, its tenets 
still apply: You can never break your code without good 
reason . 
  Gray guards can freely multiclass between paladin and 
gray guard . 
ex- gray guards
As  a  gray  guard,  you  are  less  at  risk  of  perma-
nently losing your abilities than a paladin 
is  . You might lose them temporarily 
for  committing  dishonor-
able  acts,  but  you  are 
granted  clemency 
for  performing 
such  deeds  in 
the name of your 
faith and can atone 
more easily . Nev-
ertheless, if you 
commit  unfor-
givably  evil  acts 
(such  as  slaugh-
tering innocents or 
despoiling  a  temple 
of  your  faith),  take 
action  that  oppos-
es your faith’s tenets, 
or habitually violate 
your code of conduct, 
you  risk  permanent 
expulsion  from  the 
holy order . 
       If at any time your 
deity  or  a  jury  of  your 
faith’s leaders finds you guilty 
of grossly abusing the freedom of the order, 
you permanently lose both gray guard and paladin class 
abilities (including the service of your special mount, but 
not weapon, armor, and shield proficiencies) and can never 
again advance in either class . Even the atonement spell can-
not restore a fallen gray guard’s abilities after he is exiled . 
Before a character enters this prestige class, his player and 
the DM should discuss and agree on what acts constitute 
gross abuse . 
  Levels of gray guard are treated as levels of paladin for the 
purpose of advancing in the blackguard prestige class .
PlaYI  ng a gra  Y guard
You have seen the horrible reality of the world: Children 
dying in the gutter as the rich feast a hedge-wall away; law 
used to imprison and terrify those it was created to protect; 
Ambros Brasmere, a gray guard
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
the supposedly devout ignoring and abusing those they 
deem beneath their interest or contrary to their faith . The 
most  insidious  evil  wears  a  cloak  of  righteousness  and 
seduces with honeyed words . Your faith’s leadership realizes 
that many paladins’ inflexible interpretation of their code 
of conduct not only allows such foulness to remain hidden 
but even aids its spread . As a gray guard, you have earned 
the freedom to seek out and destroy corruption through 
any means necessary . 
  Although  you  work  toward  the  same  goals  as  other 
members of your faith, many within it do not trust you . 
They believe that you and your fellows at best flirt with 
corruption and at worst embrace it . Paladins see freedom 
from their code of conduct as weakness, an inability to mete 
out justice through honorable means, and do not consider 
you to be their equal . 
  You are not proud of your role, but you accept that one 
must sometimes embrace a lesser evil to combat greater 
injustice . Your freedom is not a boon but a loss of innocence, 
a permanent tarnish on a once-pristine soul . Solidifying 
your resolve, you face the world of cruel reality, ready to do 
battle just as valiantly as any paladin but also just as brutally 
as the monstrosities you oppose .
Combat
In battle you are not just a warrior, but also a judge . If you 
can, you engage your opponent in honorable combat to 
prove the valor of your cause . However, you are no fool . 
If the only sure way to finish the high priest of a cult of 
Vecna is to stab him as he sleeps or lie in wait and attack 
from the shadows, you make such sacrifices of character to 
put a permanent end to the threat . Thus, your tactics must 
change to suit the enemy and the conditions of battle .
  Your mercy also must conform to the necessities of the 
moment . Ideally you would bring defeated enemies before 
the  proper  authorities  for  righteous  judgment,  but  the 
reality of your situation might prevent you from taking 
prisoners, especially if they are likely to escape or impede 
your greater aims . Some powerful threats simply cannot be 
permitted to live and potentially rise again . A momentary 
prayer and a coup de grace end the lives of many of your 
foes    .
advancement
As a paladin, you were frustrated by members of that noble 
order who seemed oblivious to the greater good, righting 
specific wrongs while ignoring others . You repeatedly came 
into conflict with your peers, even violating your code of 
conduct to satisfy your sense of justice . You were finally 
approached by leaders of your church or a stern knight in 
tarnished armor, who asked how much you would sacrifice 
for your faith and a clean conscience .
  As a gray guard, you understand that your enemies’ tactics 
might aid you as well . Skills that you might have disdained 
before, such as Bluff, Disguise, Intimidate, or even Move 
Silently, Hide, and Open Lock can be invaluable in your 
work . Feats such as Mobility, Spring Attack, and Stealthy 
help you get at the greatest threat and bring it down . In 
addition, you are ever on the hunt for items that cloak 
your aura of good and any other ties to your faith that your 
enemies’ magic might reveal .
resources
Although  your  order  sometimes  points  you  toward 
suspected evils, you are primarily a knight-errant, doing 
what you can wherever you are needed . The grim few who 
make up your order aid you as much as they can, but their 
ranks are small . Primarily you can depend only on your 
rare allies . 
  As a member of an organized religion, you might be able 
to draw upon the resources of your church . However, you 
often face prejudice from those within your own order: 
Instead of being helpful, they treat you indifferently or 
worse . Those who understand and recognize your service 
provide spellcasting and equipment for half the normal 
cost, but those who distrust you might not offer aid even 
at standard prices .
gra  Y guards In   The World
“How’re we supposed to see the pally comin’ when ’e wears armor 
blacker than ours?”
—Griv “Goblin Father” Chos, unfortunate cultist guard
In  any  campaign  featuring  less  than  black-and-white 
morality, gray guards might rise from the ranks of the 
most devout warriors to challenge hidden evils and work 
toward sweeping change . Such orders give paladins the 
opportunity to wage war against injustice without undue 
worry about getting their hands dirty .
organization
Orders  of  gray  guards  might  be  created  as  part  of  any 
lawful- or good-aligned religion that sponsors paladins . 
The organization of such an order might vary dramatically 
from faith to faith, as well as how others within their church 
perceive them . Some gray guards might form covert cells 
that parallel their church’s “legitimate” paladin orders .
  A typical order of gray guards works separately from a 
church’s hierarchy of paladins . Though rarely hidden, the 
order is not discussed openly by officials of the faith . Much 
like inquisitors or witch hunters, gray guards are a feared 
aspect of the church that few care to acknowledge .
  Only  a  few  among  the  faith’s  paladins  have  what  it 
takes to become gray guards . Once chosen, they are free 
of the paladin’s rigid code but are still carefully watched . 
Churches monitor their work, knowing that such proximity 
to the wicked can endanger their faith . Gray guards often 
seek out a place of worship to confess the burdens on their 
souls, which they see as a sacred duty . 
  Gray guards have no holdings, no halls of triumph, and 
only the most limited rosters of duty . Among them only two 
ranks exist: gray guard and captain (usually a veteran of the 


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
order’s cause) . The order has an unofficial hierarchy based 
on experience and seniority, but only a captain has direct 
authority over members . In such a small organization, the 
captain knows every knight and assigns direction as suits 
the personality and abilities of each . Other interests within 
the church (such as concerned priests and rival paladins) 
frequently try to influence or hinder the work of the gray 
guards . In order to shield them from such internal politics, 
gray guards are often sent far afield, with instructions to 
report for orders only infrequently .
nPC    reactions
Most  folk  assume  gray  guards  are  typical  warriors  or 
mercenaries and treat them as such . The members of a gray 
guard’s own faith treat him with widely differing attitudes . 
Many within the church see the very existence of the order 
as conceding to evil, the first step to becoming no better 
than those the faith would oppose . Those whom you would 
protect abhor your very existence and might even hinder 
you   . Others understand the need for distasteful action to 
root out evil and can be helpful toward the order . Paladins 
disdain gray guards, rarely having attitudes warmer than 
indifferent toward them .
gra  Y guard lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (religion) can research 
gray guards to learn more about them . When a character 
succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is revealed, 
including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Gray guards are paladins who aren’t bound by a 
code of conduct .
 DC 15: Gray guards seek out injustice in all its forms, 
often using the tools and methods of their enemies against 
them .
 DC 20: Paladins often distrust them, but gray guards 
take their code of conduct just as seriously as other holy 
warriors do and violate its tenets only in the best interest 
of their faith . 
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about gray guards in your campaign, 
including faiths that sponsor such orders, notable members, 
the areas where they currently operate, and the kinds of 
activities they undertake .
  Servants of religions that support orders of gray guards 
should have little problem contacting members through 
church  officials .  Characters  without  such  connections 
might be able to leave messages for gray guards in care of 
members of the same faith .
gra  Y guards In   The gaMe
Gray guards are relatively easy to integrate into any cam-
paign featuring powerful religions . The notion that such 
devout  organizations  have  semisecret  agents  working 
toward their diverse causes probably doesn’t stretch the 
imagination .  Nor  does  the  concept  that  such  powerful 
groups—no matter how pure they might appear—might 
resort  to  less  than  ethical  means  of  dealing  with  their 
hated opponents .
  The easiest way to introduce gray guards into your cam-
paign is to have the PCs encounter one working toward 
a parallel goal . Presenting a gray guard as a potential ally 
gives the PCs a chance to ask questions and learn more 
about the order . After such an encounter, a devoted but 
frustrated paladin within the party might pursue member-
ship   . Alternatively, an NPC gray guard might be a rival to 
a PC paladin, producing interesting tension .
adaptation
If gray guards don’t appeal to you as presented, you can 
readily convert their order to fill other niches . With their 
freedom to exact justice on those of any alignment, gray 
guards make excellent inquisitors . Such church investiga-
tors  might  openly  enforce  their  faith’s  beliefs,  hunting 
down heretics, witches, or any others viewed as violating 
holy law . Alternatively, they might serve as church police, 
with the authority to seek out injustices among the devout 
or monitor paladins’ adherence to their code of conduct . 
Instead of making the gray guard a prestige class, you can 
adjust the paladin class to grant its features at advanced 
levels, representing a higher order free to right wrongs 
as it sees fit .
sample encounter
PCs hunting a villain who hides behind a mask of righteous-
ness might not be the only ones on their target’s trail . Such 
lurking evil can attract the attention of a gray guard . 
 EL  11:  For  the  last  two  years,  Ambros  Brasmere  has 
hunted an elusive cult of the demon prince Malcanthet, 
Queen of Succubi . His recent investigations suggest that 
the popular owner of a local theater has connections to the 
cult    . This prominent socialite is ever surrounded by his 
retinue of attendants, bodyguards, and sycophants, any of 
whom might be a fiend in disguise or merely an infatuated 
innocent . Ambros seeks a few allies to help him force his 
way past the suspected cultist’s clique and get the informa-
tion he needs, through any means necessary .
Ambros Brasmere CR 11
Male half-elf paladin 7/gray guard 4
LG Medium humanoid
Init +0; Senses low-light vision; Listen +3, Spot +3
Aura courage (10 ft., allies +4 against fear)
Languages	Common, Elven
AC 22, touch 10, flat-footed 22
 (+9 armor, +3 shield)
hp 76 (11 HD)
Immune disease, fear, sleep
Fort +14, Ref +7, Will +14 (+16 against enchantments)
Speed 20 ft. (4 squares)
Melee +2 longsword +15/+10/+5 (1d8+4/19–20)
Base	Atk	+11; Grp	+13
Atk	Options smite evil or chaos 3/day (+3 attack, +11 damage) 
Special	Actions debilitating touch, lay on hands 33 points/
day, turn undead 6/day (+5, 2d6+7, 4th)


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Paladin	Spells	Prepared (CL 9th):
	2nd—undetectable alignment
	1st—divine favor, protection from evil
Spell-Like	Abilities (CL 7th):
 At will—detect evil
 1/week—remove disease
Abilities	Str 14, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 11, Wis 15, Cha 17
SQ sacrament of trust, special mount 1/day (heavy warhorse, 
14 hours), strong aura of good
Feats Endurance, Diehard, Iron Will, Quick Draw
Skills Bluff +8, Climb +0, Concentration +2, Diplomacy +9, 
Disguise +3 (+5 acting), Gather Information +5, Handle 
Animal +6, Heal +4, Intimidate +5, Knowledge (religion) 
+8, Listen +3, Move Silently +0, Ride +2, Search +1, Sense 
Motive +7, Spot +3
Possessions	+1 silent moves full plate, +1 heavy steel shield, +2 
longsword, cloak of resistance +1, ring of climbing, potion of 
pass without trace, healer’s kit, wooden holy symbol
MagIC al TrICks  Ter
“Don’t  make  the  mistake  of  assuming  that  spells  are  the  only 
trick up my sleeve.”
—Sorilae Hartsel, magical trickster
Relying as much on her wits as on her spellcasting prowess, 
the magical trickster can sacrifice her spellcasting ability 
to gain even greater access to skill tricks .
beCoMI  ng a MagIC al TrIC ks  Ter
Although this prestige class supports spellcasting, it appeals 
mainly to casters with low hit points and few other class 
features, such as sorcerers and wizards . Sorcerers excel as 
magical tricksters, since they have plentiful spell uses with 
which to power skill tricks . On the divine side, the prestige 
class most appeals to favored souls, shugenjas, and spirit 
shamans (all described in Complete  Divine), all of whom 
also have a large number of daily spell uses . Clerics and 
druids rarely bother with the class, except for worshipers 
of trickster deities . 
Entry Requirements
Feats: Any one metamagic feat.
Spellcasting: Ability to cast 3rd-level spells.
Skill	Tricks: Any two.
Class fea Tures
A magical trickster focuses on skill tricks, even sacrificing 
spells for greater access to them .
 Spellcasting: At each level after 1st, you gain new 
spells per day and an increase in caster level (and spells 
known, if applicable) as if you had also gained a level in 
a spellcasting class to which you belonged before adding 
the prestige class level . You do not, however, gain any 
other benefit a character of that class would have gained . 
If you had more than one spellcasting class before becom-
ing a magical trickster, you must decide to which class 
to add each level for the purpose of determining spells 
per day, caster level, and spells known .
 Bonus Trick: At 1st level, and again at 3rd level, you 
gain a bonus skill trick for which you meet the prereq-
uisite . These bonus tricks do not cost skill points and do 
not count against your maximum number of skill tricks 
available .
 Spontaneous   Trickster   (Su):  You  can  channel 
magical  potential  into  using  skill  tricks  more  often, 
effectively  “recharging”  them .  As  a  swift  action,  you 
can “lose” any spell slot or prepared spell of 1st level or 
higher to perform a trick that you have already used in 
the encounter .
 Bonus Metamagic Feat: At 2nd level, you gain a bonus 
metamagic feat for which you meet the prerequisite .
 Metamagic  Trick  (Ex): Beginning at 3rd level, you 
understand how to apply the principle of tricks to your 
spellcasting . Once per day you can apply the effect of 
any one metamagic feat you know to a spell as you cast it 
without altering the spell’s effective level . The spell slot 
adjustment of the metamagic feat can’t exceed four .
 Tricky  Magic  (Ex): At 3rd level, you have mastered 
incorporating tricks into your spellcasting routines . On 
any round that you perform a skill trick, the save DC of 
the next spell you cast that round is increased by 1 .
PlaYI  ng a MagIC al TrIC ks  Ter
You are unpredictable and extremely adaptable . As long 
as you still have spells available to cast, your bag of skill 
tricks is nearly unlimited, giving you an opportunity to 
overcome most challenges .
  You are drawn to others who can perform skill tricks, 
and from them you learn yet more . Becoming a trick 
expert instantly affiliates you with a very loose fellowship 
of tricksters (battle, uncanny, and magical) . You don’t 
get along with every trickster you meet, though: Some 
jealously guard their secrets and view others of their kind 
as rivals .
Table 2–9: The Magical Trickster  Hit Die: d6
	Base			
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Spellcasting
1st +0 +0 +0 +2 Bonus trick, spontaneous trickster —
2nd +1 +0 +0 +3 Bonus metamagic feat +1 level of existing spellcasting class
3rd +1 +1 +1 +3 Bonus trick, metamagic trick, tricky magic +1 level of existing spellcasting class
Class	Skills	(4	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Bluff, Climb, Concentration, Craft, Diplomacy, Jump, Knowledge (arcana), Knowledge 
(religion), Profession, Spellcraft, Tumble, Use Rope.


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Combat
Your spells are even more valuable to you than a typical 
caster’s, and you should use them judiciously . You walk 
a narrow line: On the one hand, you can enhance your 
combat effectiveness with your spontaneous tricks, but on 
the other, your allies depend on your spellcasting support . 
Such decisions depend on the structure of the party and 
the opponent you face . In a party with multiple casters, you 
have more freedom to use your tricks, while a party with 
several tricky characters needs your spells more .
advancement
Whether you received a divine gift or extended your arcane 
knowledge, you discovered you had a natural talent for skill 
tricks and put yourself on the path to learning more . A 
mentor might have shown you how to tap into your magical 
ability to fuel your repertoire, or you might have learned 
it on your own through hours of meditation . 
  As a magical trickster, you readily adapt to any situa-
tion   . No longer are you bound only by what spells you 
know  or  prepare .  Your  allies  probably  appreciate  this 
flexibility—unless they have also focused their careers on 
learning tricks and resent your freedom and flexibility . 
  Even  though  you  gain  bonus  skill  tricks  from  this 
prestige class, you should continue to invest skill points in 
learning new tricks . The more you have, the more potent 
and unpredictable you become . Feats that grant bonus skill 
tricks, such as Freerunner (page 77), are good options, as 
are metamagic feats, which you can apply more easily to 
your spells than others can .
resources
Although you might not have realized it when you became 
a magical trickster, you are part of a larger (albeit very 
loosely organized) group . The benefits and requirements 
of this group are few, but it does offer the camaraderie 
of  shared  experiences  as  well  as  the  chance  to  learn 
new tricks . Nevertheless, tricksters owe no more to one 
another than do any other people with similar, nonbind-
ing interests . 
MagIC al TrIC ks  Ters  
In The World
“She mastered the difficult trick I’d just shown her, then suddenly 
pulled it off again without a thought. Why can’t I do that?”
—Ameslan Trag, uncanny trickster
The magical trickster is relatively easy to integrate into 
a campaign that employs the skill trick rules . She works 
much like any other trickster character, except that her 
talent is powered by magic . Whether through divine favor 
or some lost arcane secret, her ability to flawlessly perform 
tricks again and again can be explained away by the source 
of her spellcasting ability . 
organization
Magical  tricksters  congregate  with  uncanny  and  battle 
tricksters when possible . Having come to the prestige class 
from different backgrounds, they have less in common with 
one another than they do with other tricksters . They swap 
techniques, introduce newly developed tricks and trick-
supporting equipment and magic, and share experiences . 
Outside observers might assume such a meeting is part of a 
circus or carnival, with tricksters springing about perform-
ing for the enjoyment and education of onlookers .
  These gatherings, though enjoyable, do not represent 
a structured organization . Magical tricksters looking to 
become part of something more permanent usually join 
groups that appreciate both their abilities and their moral 
choices: churches, arcane guilds, or druid circles . 
nPC    reactions
A  magical  trickster  can  make  other  people  frustrated 
or  concerned .  She  can  perform  skill  tricks  over  and 
over that others cannot easily repeat, even after years of 
practice . Other sorts of tricksters treat a known magical 
trickster with contempt and silence, and are almost always 
unfriendly .  If  she  belonged  to  an  organization  before 
entering the prestige class, a magical trickster might be the 
subject of concern or quiet whispers among her colleagues 
and superiors . Although other members of the organization 
still respect her, their attitudes usually slip a step, such as 
from helpful to friendly or friendly to indifferent .
  Common folk do not understand the difference between 
magical tricksters and other trickster classes, so their atti-
tudes span the spectrum . However, because some tricksters 
use their abilities to take advantage of less talented folk, a 
victim of such exploitation has a negative view of all trick-
sters, magical or otherwise, and is unfriendly at best . 
MagIC al TrIC ks  Ter    lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana) can research 
magical  tricksters  to  learn  more  about  them .  When  a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Magical tricksters combine magical talent with 
odd stunts relying on trained skill .
 DC 15: Magical tricksters learn to pull off surprises with 
their magic just as they can with their skills .
 DC 20:  Magical  tricksters  can  give  up  some  of  their 
magical power to perform stunts again and again .
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific magical tricksters 
in  your  campaign,  including  a  notable  individual,  the 
area in which she operates, and the kinds of activities she 
undertakes .
  PCs searching for a magical trickster who belongs to an 
organization can contact her through it . A magical trickster 
affiliated with no group is more difficult to track down, 
although other tricksters in the area probably know of her .


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
MagIC al TrIC ks  Ters  
In   The gaMe
An NPC magical trickster makes an interesting and unpre-
dictable opponent . She seems to be a typical spellcaster 
until  she  suddenly  performs  a  powerful  and  difficult 
trick—then repeats it a moment later . Magical tricksters 
tend to avoid one another unless of the same faith, guild, 
or school, so you should probably avoid introducing more 
than one per encounter .
  Players who like flexibility and variety should find the 
prestige class appealing . A magical trickster can serve the 
party with either her spells or her tricks, adapting as needed 
to a given encounter . 
adaptation
You can easily change this prestige class into a psionic 
trickster by replacing spells with psionic power points as 
the “currency” for reusing tricks . Rather than sacrificing 
a spell slot or prepared spell to recharge a trick, a psionic 
trickster expends 2 power points .
sample encounter
Magical tricksters seek out other trick users to discover 
new tricks . A PC who uses a skill trick in public might get 
an unexpected visit from a magical trickster . 
 EL  11: Sorilae Hartsel is an amazing, playful beauty 
with a cruel streak . She enjoys showing off her abilities, 
using them to seduce gullible tricksters into revealing 
their tricks, then abandoning her lovers to move on to 
the  next  game .  If  her  skills  alone  are  inadequate,  she 
turns to charm spells to get what she wants . Sometimes 
she uses her newfound skills to humiliate and torment 
her unwitting mentors . 
  The PCs might stumble across Sorilae on her way from 
or to an assignation . If the party contains a trickster PC 
who seems an interesting prospect, she attempts to attract 
that character’s attention with an eye to collecting a new 
trick . 
Sorilae Hartsel CR 11
Female human sorcerer 8/magical trickster 3
NE Medium humanoid
Init +2; Senses Listen +3, Spot +3 
Languages	Common, Draconic, empathic link
AC 14, touch 13, flat-footed 12; Dodge
 (+2 Dex, +1 deflection, +1 natural)
hp 36 (11 HD) 
Fort +3, Ref +5, Will +10
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee	mwk dagger +5 (1d4–1/19–20) or
Melee whip +4 (1d3–1 nonlethal)
Ranged mwk dagger +8 (1d4–1/19–20)
Base	Atk	+5; Grp	+4
Atk	Options skill tricks, tricky magic
Special	Actions metamagic trick, spontaneous trickster
Combat	Gear 3 potions of cure moderate wounds
Sorcerer	Spells	Known (CL 10th; 1d20 +12 to overcome SR):
 5th (4/day)—dominate person (DC 20)
4th (6/day)—charm monster (DC 19), phantasmal killer 
(DC 19)
 3rd (7/day)—haste, heroism, fireball (DC 18)
2nd (7/day)—daze monster (DC 17), glitterdust (DC 17), 
touch of idiocy (+4 melee touch; DC 17), web (DC 17)
1st (8/day)—mage armor, magic missile, protection from 
evil, ray of enfeeblement (+7 ranged touch; DC 16), 
shield
0 (6/day)—acid splash (+7 ranged touch), detect magic, 
light, mage hand, mending, open/close, prestidigita-
tion, ray of frost (+7 ranged touch), touch of fatigue (+4 
melee touch; DC 15)
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 14, Con 10, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 21
SQ familiar, share spells, spontaneous trickster
Feats Alertness
B
 (if familiar within 5 ft.), Dodge, Extend 
Spell
B
, Exotic Weapon Proficiency (whip)
B
, Sweet Talker*, 
Spell Penetration, Still Spell
B
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Bluff +22, Concentration +14, Diplomacy +7, Disguise 
+5 (+7 acting), Escape Artist +2 (+4 involving ropes), 
Intimidate +7, Knowledge (arcana) +8, Listen +3, Sleight of 
Hand +5, Spellcraft +12, Spot +3, Use Rope +8 
Sorilae Hartsel, a magical trickster
Illus. by H. Lyon


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Skill	Tricks* Collector of Stories, False Theurgy, Group Fake-
Out, Never Outnumbered, Swift Concentration, Timely 
Misdirection, Whip Climber
 *Described in Chapter 3
Possessions	combat gear plus 2 masterwork daggers, amulet 
of natural armor +1, ring of protection +1, cloak of Charisma 
+4, jewelry worth 200 gp 
Dos, Tiny Viper Familiar CR —
NE Tiny magical beast (augmented animal)
Init +3; Senses scent; Listen +6, Spot +6
Languages empathic link, speak with master, speak with 
reptiles
AC 21, touch 15, flat-footed 18
 (+2 size, +3 Dex, +6 natural)
hp 16 (8 HD)
Resist improved evasion
Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +10
Speed 15 ft. (3 squares), climb 15 ft., swim 15 ft.
Melee	bite +8 (1 plus poison)
Space 2-1/2 ft.; Reach 0 ft.
Base	Atk	+5; Grp	–6
Atk	Options deliver touch spells, poison (Fort DC 10, 1d6 
Con/1d6 Con)
Abilities	Str 4, Dex 17, Con 11, Int 9, Wis 12, Cha 2
Feats Weapon Finesse
Skills Bluff +10, Balance +11, Climb +11, Concentration +14, 
Hide +15, Listen +6, Spot +6
MalConvoker
“Take him, my slaves! Drag his soul back to your dark masters!”
—Argyll Te’Shea, servant of Pelor and malconvoker
The standard concept of the perpetual war between good 
and evil is clichéd to some: a black-and-white vision of 
reality, suitable only for religious sermonizing . A few who 
understand the complexity of the battles that rage through-
out the planes have taken up a dangerous path, entering into 
powerful pacts with the foulest abominations of the Lower 
Planes to turn evil against evil . These daring summoners 
are malconvokers, and they bargain with their lives .
beCoMI  ng a MalConvoker
The  vast  majority  of  malconvokers  are  sorcerers  and 
wizards (typically conjurers) who focus on summoning 
creatures . A few clerics find the class interesting, but most 
have difficulty accepting the idea of using evil creatures to 
accomplish good acts .
Entry Requirements
Alignment: Any non-evil. 
Skills: Bluff 4 ranks, Knowledge (the planes) 4 ranks. 
Languages: Celestial, Infernal.
Feats: Augment Summoning, Spell Focus (conjuration).
Special: Ability to cast summon monster III.
Class fea Tures
As a malconvoker, you turn the powers of your enemies 
back upon them, deceiving creatures into opposing those 
they might typically ally with . Your evil foes are least pre-
pared to deal with the same arsenal of abilities and tactics 
they employ themselves .
 Spellcasting: At each level beyond 1st, you gain new 
spells per day and an increase in caster level (and spells 
known, if applicable) as if you had also gained a level in 
a spellcasting class to which you belonged before adding 
the prestige class level . You do not, however, gain any other 
benefit a character of that class would have gained . If you 
had more than one spellcasting class before becoming a 
malconvoker, you must decide to which class to add each 
level for the purpose of determining spells per day, caster 
level, and spells known .
 Deceptive Summons (Su): At 1st level, you can attempt 
to trick evil creatures you conjure into serving you for 
longer than they normally would . When casting a summon 
monster  spell  to  summon  an  evil-aligned  creature,  you 
can attempt a Bluff check as a free action, opposed by the 
creature’s  Sense  Motive  check .  If  your  check  succeeds, 
the duration of the effect is doubled (as if by the Extend 
Spell feat), and the summoned creature might be subject to 
additional effects as described below . If it fails, the duration 
remains as normal and no additional effects can be applied . 
If you fail the check by 5 or more, the creature breaks free 
of your control and is hostile toward you (though it still 
disappears as normal when the spell’s duration ends) .
  If you use this ability when summoning multiple crea-
tures, you must attempt an opposed skill check separately 
against each creature you wish to affect . 
  Beginning at 4th level, you can whip the deceived crea-
tures into an infernal fury . If your Bluff check to extend 
the duration of summoning succeeds, the creatures get a 
+2 bonus on weapon damage rolls and 2 extra hit points per 
Hit Die (in addition to the bonuses conferred by Augment 
Summoning) .
  Beginning at 7th level, you can instill the deceived crea-
tures with exceptional resistance to your enemies’ attempts 
to control or dismiss them . If your Bluff check to extend 
the duration of summoning succeeds, the creatures get a 
+2 bonus on Will saves, and your effective caster level is 
increased by 2 for the purpose of resisting dispel magic and 
similar effects against those creatures .
 Unrestricted  Conjuration: For the purpose only of 
casting conjuration spells, you can ignore any restrictions 
that forbid you from casting spells of certain alignments . 
In addition, regular use of conjuration spells with the evil 
descriptor does not threaten to change your alignment . 
For example, a good cleric who becomes a malconvoker 
could cast summon monster I to summon a fiendish raven 
(whose alignment gives the spell the evil descriptor) . The 
cleric could not cast death knell, though, which has the evil 
descriptor but is not of the conjuration school . 


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
 Planar Binding: Beginning at 2nd level, you can add 
the following spells to your class spell list and your list of 
known spells (or your spellbook) at the indicated levels . If 
you already have one or more of these spells on your class 
list at a different level, treat it as being of the lower level .
  5th: lesser planar binding.
  6th: planar binding.
  8th: greater planar binding.
 Skill Focus (Bluff): At 3rd level, you gain Skill Focus 
(Bluff) as a bonus feat . If you already have this feat, you can 
select any other feat for which you meet the prerequisite .
 Fiendish Legion (Ex): Once you attain 5th level, when-
ever you use a summon monster spell to summon one or more 
evil-aligned creatures, you summon one extra creature of 
the same kind .
 Deceitful  Bargaining  (Ex): Starting at 6th level, you 
become exceptionally adept at convincing evil creatures you 
call that your intentions parallel their own . Upon calling an 
evil outsider using a planar binding spell, you can make a Bluff 
check opposed by the creature’s Sense Motive skill check . 
If you succeed on this check, the called creature becomes 
more amenable to your cause, taking a –5 penalty on the 
opposed Charisma check made to refuse serving you . If 
you fail, the creature immediately makes a new Will saving 
throw against your spell . On a failure, the spell functions as 
normal . If it succeeds on this save, the creature breaks free 
of your control and can either flee or attack you .
 Improved Calling (Su): At 8th level, your understand-
ing of the ways of fiends shows you how to tempt even more 
powerful beings into your service . The normal HD limit for 
your planar ally and planar binding spells (including lesser 
and greater versions) increases by 2 .
 Safe Summoning (Ex): At 9th level, you can dismiss 
any evil creature that you have summoned as an immediate 
action rather than as a standard action .
PlaYI  ng a MalConvoker
You have always honed your conjuration magic beyond 
that of your other spells, even flirting with the idea of 
summoning powerful fiends to do your bidding, but you 
never actually carried through with such a disreputable act . 
At least, not until that book appeared . Many malconvok-
ers—too many for pure coincidence—were set upon their 
path by a seemingly serendipitous event: the appearance of 
a thin folio bound in black scales entitled the Vital Pact . 
  This thesis, written in Celestial, discusses the limited 
ranks and resources of the extraplanar forces of good as 
opposed to the endless armies of the Lower Planes . It calls 
for vague new allies from realms only hinted at but also 
posits that, for the armies of light to survive, evil must be 
made to combat itself . Such a philosophical treatise would 
normally inspire few, were it not for the last page . Each copy 
of the work bears a name—a truename—handwritten in 
red ink along with notations to aid in summoning a specific 
fiend . (See the Tome of Magic supplement for more about 
truename magic .) With the essay’s radical ideas fresh in the 
reader’s mind, often echoing similar personal thoughts, the 
temptation to investigate the darker side of conjuration is 
usually too strong to resist .
  None can say who penned the Vital Pact, how the work 
mysteriously enters the possession of certain spellcasters, 
and where the unique closing notations come from . Even 
the  fiends  first  summoned  using  the  text  seem  wholly 
ignorant  of  its  contents  or  how  they  became  involved . 
Although many malconvokers accept the Vital  Pact as a 
boon from some hidden patron or celestial power, some 
scholars fear a more sinister underlying motive .
  Whatever the truth, you have been chosen . Someone or 
something wanted you to receive a copy of the Vital Pact 
and take up the challenge it proposes, even if you never 
actually hold the book in your hands . Whether you will-
ingly accept this mandate or seek to discover its source, 
you cannot deny the effectiveness of its teachings and the 
good you could put them to . 
  As you grow in power, your involvement in the planar 
battle between good and evil also increases . You might begin 
seeking out places where fiendish influence has leaked into 
the world, seeking to scour such taints from your home 
plane . Alternatively, you might travel to other planes, seek-
ing out celestial forces or infiltrating oft-contested infernal 
battlegrounds such as Acheron, Pazunia on the Abyss’s Plain 
of Infinite Portals, and Hell’s first layer, Avernus .
Table 2–10: The Malconvoker Hit Die: d4
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Spellcasting
1st +0 +0 +0 +2 Deceptive summons, unrestricted conjuration —
2nd +1 +0 +0 +3 Planar binding +1 level of existing spellcasting class
3rd +1 +1 +1 +3 Skill Focus (Bluff ) +1 level of existing spellcasting class
4th +2 +1 +1 +4 Deceptive summons (fury) +1 level of existing spellcasting class
5th +2 +1 +1 +4 Fiendish legion +1 level of existing spellcasting class
6th +3 +2 +2 +5 Deceitful bargaining +1 level of existing spellcasting class
7th +3 +2 +2 +5 Deceptive summons (resistance) +1 level of existing spellcasting class
8th +4 +2 +2 +6 Improved calling +1 level of existing spellcasting class
9th +4 +3 +3 +6 Safe summoning +1 level of existing spellcasting class
Class	Skills	(2	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Bluff, Concentration, Craft, Disguise, Knowledge (arcana), Knowledge (religion), 
Knowledge (the planes), Profession, Spellcraft.

0
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Combat
As a malconvoker, you rarely fight alone . The versatility of 
the summon monster spells allows you to conjure many al-
lies, whether you are a solitary traveler or part of a group . 
With enough such spells and your fiendish legion class 
feature, you can become the general of 
a  small  infernal  army .  Your  other 
powers, although sometimes risky, 
also ensure that the creatures you 
summon stay longer and are more 
powerful than those summoned 
by your enemies . 
advancement
You come to understand the 
ways of fiends, honing your 
words  to  offer  the  prop-
er  mix  of  compliments, 
threats,  and  promises 
to whet their infernal 
desires .  As  you  grow 
in  power,  so  do  the 
beings  you  deal  with, 
increasing  the  forces 
you  can  bring  to  bear 
but also the risks in bar-
gaining with such corrupt 
abominations . 
  Tricking  powerful 
fiends  is  much  more 
difficult than manipu-
lating  lowly  minions . 
Thus, you should max 
out  your  Bluff  skill  to 
get the most out of your decep-
tive bargaining; increasing your Charisma 
score is also important for planar binding nego-
tiations . Put ranks into Knowledge (the planes) 
to learn the strengths and weaknesses of the 
creatures  you  summon,  so  you  can  choose 
the best allies for a given situation . Feats that aid your 
summoning are also helpful, such as Cloudy Conjuration 
(Complete Mage) or Complete Divine’s Rapid Spell (which 
reduces the casting time of your summon monster spells 
to a standard action) .
resources
While  advancing  as  a  malconvoker,  you  continue  to 
strengthen your spellcasting ability, though if you are a 
divine caster affiliated with a church, your peers might 
have reservations about your methods . Nevertheless, you 
might be able to discover and contact other malconvok-
ers (by succeeding on a reasonably difficult Knowledge 
[arcana] check) . These peers welcome the rare fellows they 
encounter and might be convinced to share their research 
and even magic items related to summoning . At the very 
least, together you can plumb the often cryptic passages of 
the Vital Pact to gain further insights into your art .
MalConvokers  
In   The World
“I have dwelt in darkness for eighty thousand years, seen 
the deaths of gods, and feasted on the souls of worlds. I 
would not be tricked by a mortal wizard.”
—Cvol Visok, nalfeshnee dupe
The  malconvoker  prestige  class  gives 
non-evil  player  characters  a  chance  to 
use some of the most powerful creatures 
in the game—and the most dangerous . 
Malconvokers  run  terrible  risks  in 
attempting to turn pure evil to the ser-
vice  of  good .  Moreover, 
they might alienate righ-
teous allies in exchange 
for  tenuous  pacts  with 
fiendish servants . The Vital 
Pact, that peculiar text that indoctri-
nates so many malconvokers, also sets 
up a dark mystery with possible celestial 
or infernal ties .
organization
Nearly  all  malconvokers 
have studied the Vital Pact, 
whether or not they possess 
a copy of the book . Some are fanatics 
devoted to its radical call to arms, oth-
ers are researchers hoping to reveal its 
shadowed  origins,  and  still  others  are 
conjurers who seek more versatility in their 
spellcasting .  This  shared  knowledge  puts  mal-
convokers into a strange sort of group, if not an 
especially organized one . No obvious thread links 
those who come across that strange text, beyond 
their affinity for summoning magic .
  Malconvokers quietly share their knowledge of extra-
planar beings, methods of deceiving those they summon, 
and, in rare circumstances, the truenames of potent or 
easily duped fiends . They secretly correspond with one 
another through mundane letters or spells to protect their 
own  identities  and  those  of  their  peers,  understanding 
that people in powerful positions abhor their methods . 
A malconvoker or his agent often leaves a letter in a well-
used cache, where another can check for correspondence 
without drawing attention . Favored spots include statues 
in crowded public places, especially those with angelic or 
religious themes .
  Every malconvoker risks having his true identity revealed 
to a fiend he once tricked into his service, which might 
then track him down and exact horrific retribution . For 
most, this dreadful prospect never becomes reality . But 
Argyll Te’Shea,  
a malconvoker
Illus. by K. Yanner

1
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
when the unthinkable happens, malconvokers can turn 
only to their peers for help . Some see it as their duty to aid 
a colleague, but many shun such an individual, terrified of 
being exposed to the same fate . 
nPC    reactions
Malconvokers elicit strong opinions . Authorities within 
lawful- or good-aligned religions see them as self-deluded 
demonologists . These critics hold that summoning funda-
mentally wicked creatures into the world is evil regardless 
of the end . True, a malconvoker cheats these beings to serve 
good aims, but two wrongs still don’t make a right . Thus, 
malconvokers have been expelled from religious orders and, 
in extreme cases, executed as heretics . Followers of other 
religions, though, welcome malconvokers, primarily those 
who revere trickster gods and other less lawful deities . They 
savor the delicious irony of turning demons loose against 
a cult of demon-worshipers . 
  Most ordinary folk cannot distinguish malconvokers 
from other spellcasters and treat them according to their 
apparent  station .  Summoning  fiends  in  a  public  area, 
however,  is  likely  to  produce  a  hostile  reaction .  Most 
people don’t care why a spellcaster can so adeptly command 
demons and devils, only that he does .
MalConvoker lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (arcana) can research 
malconvokers to learn more about them . When a character 
succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is revealed, 
including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10:  Malconvokers  are  conjurers  who  summon 
demons, devils, and other fiends and trick them into aiding 
the cause of good . 
 DC 15: Malconvokers are feared by many, despite their 
good intentions . The creatures they summon are often more 
powerful than other summoned monsters of their kind .
 DC 20: Many malconvokers begin summoning fiends 
at the suggestion of a strange book called the Vital Pact . 
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific malconvokers in your 
campaign, including a notable individual, the area in which 
he operates, and how to contact him .
  Contacting a malconvoker depends on his social status 
and how greatly he fears oppression or pursuit . Correspon-
dence might take place through letters left at prearranged 
drop points . 
MalConvokers In   The gaMe
Malconvokers can fill a number of roles in your campaign . 
They might be reckless summoners who call on forces 
they don’t fully understand, their judgment clouded by 
their zeal to combat evil . Particularly power-hungry indi-
viduals might wage personal wars against fiends and their 
influences .  More  thoughtful,  conflicted  malconvokers 
believe in the necessity of sacrificing innocence to gain 
powerful allies . 
  Malconvokers make challenging player characters . On 
the  one  hand,  they  can  aid  their  colleagues  with  their 
command over terrible creatures . Their research into the 
truenames of useful or powerful fiends, and their deep 
knowledge of planar matters, also make them helpful to 
their comrades . On the other hand, clerics, druids, and 
paladins often oppose a malconvoker’s methods, fearful 
of  not  only  the  dark  creatures  he  controls  but  also  his 
intentions . Such fear might also mean a malconvoker and 
his associates are pursued by members of demon-hunting 
religions or fearful locals . 
adaptation
The origin and purpose of the Vital Pact are deliberately 
left open so that you can create a background appropriate 
to your campaign . Depending on your taste, the mysteri-
ous  text  can  be  benevolent,  subtly  corruptive,  or  even 
nonexistent .
  If  your  campaign  doesn’t  focus  on  cultic  tomes  and 
monstrosities of the Lower Planes, you can easily adapt the 
malconvoker to fulfill more obviously benevolent roles . 
Change  the  summoned  creatures  from  evil-aligned  to 
good-aligned to have him command a celestial strike force 
as powerful as fiends . Doing so also removes the moral and 
intraparty conflicts members of this class might otherwise 
face   . Alternatively, a malconvoker can summon a different 
kind of creature in the fight against evil . Such powerful 
beings can still be dangerous to deal with . 
sample encounter
Many folk mistake malconvokers for evil spellcasters, and 
the PCs are no exception . Facing a conjurer aided by fiend-
ish beings, some characters might make a snap judgment 
and attack someone who is actually on the same side .
 EL 12: The PCs have been hired to track down and arrest 
the leaders of a destructive cult of Hextor . They stalk the 
dark crusaders, who have a lair in the buried slums beneath 
the city . There the party finds its prey beset by a chain-
wielding kyton eagerly flailing away at the cultists . Behind 
the chain devil, casting spells into the fray and shouting 
commands, spins a dark-cloaked figure surrounded by other 
fiendish creatures . Do the PCs aid those they were sent to 
capture against what appears to be a greater threat, or do 
they allow the fiends and their seemingly corrupt master 
to slaughter their quarry?
Argyll Te’Shea CR 12
Male elf cleric 8/malconvoker 4
CG Medium humanoid
Init +1; Senses low-light vision; Listen +4, Spot +4
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Common, Elven, Infernal
AC 16, touch 11, flat-footed 15
 (+1 Dex, +4 armor, +1 natural)
hp 38 (12 HD)
Immune sleep
Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +15
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Melee +1 holy heavy mace +9/+4 (1d8+2)
Base	Atk	+8; Grp	+8
Special	Actions deceptive summons (fury), greater turning 1/
day, spontaneous casting (cure spells), turn undead 6/day 
(+5, 2d6+11, 8th)
Combat	Gear potion of resist energy ( fire), scroll of summon 
monster VII	
Cleric	Spells	Prepared (CL 11th):
	6th—blade barrier
D
 (DC 18), summon monster VI
5th—dispel evil
D
 (DC 17; CL 12th), lesser planar binding 
(DC 18), summon monster V
4th—dismissal (DC 16), fire shield
D
, lesser planar ally, 
summon monster IV
3rd—daylight, dispel magic, magic circle against evil
D
 
(CL 12th), searing light (+9 ranged touch), summon 
monster III
2nd—aid, align weapon, augury, eagle’s splendor, heat 
metal
D
 (DC 14), sound burst (DC 14)
1st—bless, detect evil, divine favor, magic stone, magic 
weapon, protection from evil
D
 (CL 12th), sanctuary 
(DC 13)
0—cure minor wounds,	detect magic, guidance, light, purify 
food and drink, resistance
 D: Domain spell. Deity: Pelor. Domains: Good, Sun.
Abilities	Str 10, Dex 13, Con 8, Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 17
SQ able to notice secret or concealed doors, strong aura of 
good, unrestricted conjuration
Feats Augment Summoning, Iron Will, Persuasive, Run, Skill 
Focus (Bluff )
B
, Spell Focus (conjuration)
Skills Bluff +18, Concentration +3, Diplomacy +7, Disguise +8 
(+10 acting), Heal +4, Intimidate +5, Knowledge (arcana) 
+6, Knowledge (religion) +6, Knowledge (the planes) +6, 
Listen +4, Search +3, Spellcraft +6, Speak Language (Abys-
sal, Infernal), Spot +4, Survival +2 (+4 on other planes)
Possessions combat gear plus +2 leather armor, +1 holy 
heavy mace, amulet of natural armor +1, cloak of resistance 
+1, everburning torch,	potion of undetectable alignment,	
healer’s kit, 4 vials of holy water
MasTer of Masks
“Every creature is but a role.”
—Beriel, Comedian of Calamity 
and Tragedian of Triumph 
Belief and perception shape reality . In worlds where reli-
gions derive might from the faith of believers and where 
amazing magic sways the mind, those who command the 
senses  hold  great  power .  In  such  an  environment,  the 
master of masks takes center stage . Wearer of a thousand 
faces, with an identity as fluid as that of a crowd of strang-
ers, this thespian of possibilities decides what is real and 
what can be .
beCoMI  ng a MasTer of Masks
A master of masks must be a consummate actor . Anyone 
capable of shifting from role to role convincingly might 
enter the prestige class . Many are bards, who are the most 
obviously  talented  in  the  performing  arts .  Particularly 
theatrical rogues or those who specialize in disguise also 
sometimes become masters of masks, as do some multiclass 
sorcerers or wizards—especially those with a fondness 
for illusions . Characters of a more martial bent or serious 
personality  usually  see  acting  as  frivolous  and  do  not 
pursue the class .
Entry Requirements
Skill: Bluff 8 ranks, Disguise 8 ranks, Perform (act) 8 ranks. 
Languages: Any four. 
Special: Must have successfully impersonated an individual, 
fooling even that person’s friends and associates.
Class fea Tures
You take on roles as befits your situation . Whether donning 
the mask of the jester to entertain a crowd or the mask of 
the gladiator and joining battle, your greatest talent is your 
versatility .
 Spellcasting: At 2nd, 4th, 7th, and 9th level, you gain 
new spells per day and an increase in caster level (and spells 
known, if applicable) as if you had also gained a level in a 
spellcasting class to which you belonged before adding the 
prestige class level . You do not, however, gain any other 
benefit a character of that class would have gained . If you 
had more than one spellcasting class before becoming a 
master of masks, you must decide to which class to add 
each level for the purpose of determining spells per day, 
caster level, and spells known .
 Persona Masks (Su): You gain the ability to craft potent 
magical masks, each of which allows you to take on a dif-
ferent persona and gain some aspect of that creature or 
archetypal character . At 1st level, you learn to create and 
use two masks selected from those described below . At 2nd 
level, and at every odd-numbered level thereafter, you can 
create and use one more mask from the list .
  Creating a new persona mask requires 8 hours of work 
and costs 100 gp . You can use only persona masks that 
you have crafted . No one else (not even another master 
of  masks)  can  benefit  from  a  persona  mask  that  you 
create .
  To gain the benefit of a mask, you merely wear it . Putting 
on a mask is a standard action, and removing one is a move 
action . Once it is worn, the mask’s benefit immediately 
applies . Your master of masks level is your caster level for 
any spell-like abilities produced by a mask . 
  In addition to its other benefits, a mask conceals your 
alignment, replacing it (for the purpose of detection spells 
or abilities) with an alignment appropriate to the mask . You 
still retain your normal alignment for all other purposes 
(such as if a paladin uses smite evil against you) .
  One or more persona masks can be worn at the same 
time, occupying the eye lenses/goggles body slot .
 Angel:  The  image  of  an  androgynous  face  with  eyes 
serenely upturned to the heavens forms this mask, carved 
from flawless alabaster . Cultic runes adorn the forehead 
and cheeks, and its edges are ringed by downy feathers .
  As  an  immediate  action,  you  can  use feather  fall  as  a 
spell-like ability any number of times per day, but only on 
yourself . 


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
  Once per day as a swift action, you can use fly as a spell-
like ability; the effect lasts for 5 rounds . As you advance 
in the master of masks class, you can use this ability more 
often: twice per day at 4th level, three times per day at 7th 
level, and four times per day at 10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be lawful good while you wear 
an angel mask .
 Archmage: This mask of deep purple fluorite is sculpted 
in the image of a heavily wrinkled old man . A roughly 
circular tangle of arcane runes appears where the visage’s 
mouth should be .
  You can use each of these spell-like abilities once per day: 
charm person, dancing lights, detect magic, and magic missile. 
As you advance in the master of masks class, you can use 
additional spell-like abilities, each once per day: 4th level, 
invisibility and scorching ray; 7th level, lightning bolt and slow; 
and 10th level, dimension door and ice storm . 
  Your caster level is treated as two higher for the purpose 
of casting arcane spells (up to a maximum of your character 
level) . If you have no arcane spellcasting ability, this effect 
grants you no benefit . 
  Your alignment appears to be chaotic good while you 
wear an archmage mask .
 Assassin: Hardened black leather and metal clasps create 
the disturbing aspect of the assassin . A jagged, cruel slit 
forms the opening for the mouth, and the mask’s edges 
are worn and stained .
  You can deliver a sneak attack that deals an extra 1d6 
points of damage when you are flanking an opponent or 
at any time when the target would be denied its Dexterity 
bonus (see the rogue class feature, PH 50)   . As you advance in 
the master of masks class, your sneak attack becomes more 
devastating: This extra damage improves to 2d6 points at 
4th level, 3d6 at 7th level, and 4d6 at 10th level . If you get 
a sneak attack bonus from another source (such as rogue 
levels), the bonuses on damage stack .
  In addition, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Hide 
and Move Silently checks . This bonus improves to +4 at 
4th level, +6 at 7th level, and +8 at 10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be lawful evil while you wear 
an assassin mask .
 Demon: This obsidian mask bears the visage of a darkly 
handsome fiend . Small, black horns adorn the demon’s 
forehead, and its black ears rise to points . Its smiling mouth 
shows rows of sharp teeth .
  Once  per  day,  you  can  use summon  monster  III  as  a 
spell-like ability, only to summon creatures of chaotic evil 
alignment . As you advance in the master of masks class, 
you can summon increasingly powerful creatures: At 4th 
level, you can instead use summon monster IV; at 7th level, 
summon monster V; and at 10th level, summon monster VI .
  Your alignment appears to be chaotic evil while you wear 
a demon mask .
 Dragon: This multihued mask of precious metals and scin-
tillating gemstones forms the terrible visage of a snarling 
wyrm . A sunburst of metallic and bejeweled scales flares 
out around the reptilian face .
  Three times per day you can breathe a cone of fire as 
a standard action . The cone is 30 feet long and deals 2d8 
points of fire damage . A successful Reflex save (DC 10 + 
your master of masks level + your Cha modifier) halves 
the damage dealt . Once you use this ability, you can’t use 
it again for 1d4 rounds . As you advance in the class, you 
can deal additional damage with this ability: 4d8 points at 
4th level, 6d8 at 7th level, and 10d8 at 10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be neutral evil while you wear 
a dragon mask .
 Faceless: Only a pair of empty eyeholes break this other-
wise featureless oval, porcelain mask .
  You gain a +5 competence bonus on saves against mind-
affecting  spells  and  abilities .  You  are  protected  from 
divination effects as if by a nondetection spell; the DC of 
the caster level check is 15 + your master of masks level .
  Even if the nondetection effect is overcome, your align-
ment  appears  to  be  neutral  while  you  wear  a  faceless 
mask .
 Gladiator: This  wyvern-hide  mask  is  shaped  like  the 
face of a grim warrior . Scars cover its surface, and silver 
chainmail rings surround its outer edge .
  You gain proficiency with all martial and exotic weapons . 
You also gain a +1 competence bonus on attack rolls and 
weapon damage rolls . As you advance in the master of 
Table 2–11: The Master of Masks  Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will	    		Masks
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Spellcasting	Known
1st +0 +0 +2 +2 Persona masks — 2
2nd +1 +0 +3 +3 — +1 level of existing spellcasting class 3
3rd +1 +1 +3 +3 Mask specialist — 4
4th +2 +1 +4 +4 — +1 level of existing spellcasting class 4
5th +2 +1 +4 +4 Many faces (2, move) — 5
6th +3 +2 +5 +5 Hidden mask — 5
7th +3 +2 +5 +5 — +1 level of existing spellcasting class 6
8th +4 +2 +6 +6 Many faces (3, swift) — 6
9th +4 +3 +6 +6 — +1 level of existing spellcasting class 7
10th +5 +3 +7 +7 Many faces (4, immediate) — 7
Class	Skills	(4	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Appraise, Bluff, Craft, Disguise, Forgery, Perform, Sleight of Hand, Speak Language.


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
masks class, you become more expert in weapon use: This 
bonus improves to +2 at 4th level, +3 at 7th level, and +4 at 
10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be neutral while you wear a 
gladiator mask .
 High Priest: This mask of rose porphyry has a wide mouth 
open in song, but instead of eyes it has slits twisted into 
runes (these do not restrict your vision) . 
  You  can  use  each  of  the  following  spell-like  abilities 
once per day: bless, cure light wounds, protection from evil, and 
sanctuary. As you advance in the class, you can use additional 
spell-like abilities, each once per day: At 4th level, you can 
use aid and lesser restoration; at 7th level, cure serious wounds 
and remove curse; and at 10th level, death ward and neutralize 
poison . 
  Your caster level is treated as two higher for the purpose 
of casting divine spells (up to a maximum of your character 
level) . If you have no divine spellcasting ability, this effect 
grants you no benefit . 
  Your alignment appears to be neutral good while you 
wear a high priest mask .
 Jester: Gaudy ribbons, tinkling bells, and a bobbing cocks-
comb adorn this leather mask . Brightly hued eyeshadow, 
lipstick, and alternating red, black, and white diamonds 
flamboyantly paint the form’s angular features .
  You gain a +2 competence bonus on Balance, Perform, 
Sleight of Hand, and Tumble checks . As you advance in the 
master of masks class, you become more proficient with 
these skills: This bonus improves to +4 at 4th level, +6 at 
7th level, and +8 at 10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be chaotic neutral while you 
wear a jester mask .
 Lich: This mask is made of poorly cured, purplish skin 
stretched over yellowed bone . Bloodless cuts and old bruises 
mar its surface, and tufts of long, white hair sprout from 
its wrinkled brow .
  Once per day you can use cause fear and detect undead as 
spell-like abilities . As you advance in the master of masks 
class, you can use additional spell-like abilities, each once 
per day: At 4th level, you can use false life; at 7th level, halt 
undead; and at 10th level, fear .
  Additionally, you gain resistance to cold 10 .
  Your  alignment  appears  to  be  neutral  evil  while  you 
wear a lich mask . Furthermore, you register as an undead 
creature with Hit Dice equal to your character level to any 
form of magical divination (such as detect undead) .
 Lord: A swirling mixture of gleaming copper and silver 
forms the regal countenance of a smiling man . A gem-stud-
ded diadem adorns its brow, and stamped across its surface 
are layered images of coins .
  Once per day, you can use remove fear as a spell-like abil-
ity  . As you advance in the master of masks class, you can 
use additional spell-like abilities, each once per day: At 4th 
level, you can use eagle’s splendor; at 7th level, heroism; and 
at 10th level, dispel chaos .
  In addition, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Diplo-
macy and Gather Information checks . This bonus improves 
to +4 at 4th level, +6 at 7th level, and +8 at 10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be lawful neutral while you 
wear a lord mask .
 Savage:  Bright,  flaking  warpaint  streaks  this  battered 
wooden image of a snarling, fang-toothed wild man . 
  Your  hands  transform  into  claws,  granting  you  two 
primary natural weapon attacks, each dealing 1d4 points 
of damage (assuming you are Medium), plus your Strength 
modifier . You are considered to be proficient with your 
natural weapons . Your claws overcome damage reduction 
as if they were magic weapons .
  As you advance in the master of masks class, you can deal 
more damage with your claws: 1d6 points at 4th level, 1d8 
at 7th level, and 2d6 at 10th level .
  Your alignment appears to be chaotic neutral while you 
wear a savage mask .
 Mask Specialist (Su): Starting at 3rd level, you innately 
enhance the abilities of any magic mask you wear (such as 
the mask of the skull, DMG 262)    . If the mask creates an effect 
that requires a saving throw, the save DC increases by 2 . 
If the mask grants a bonus on skill checks, that bonus is 
increased by 2 . Otherwise, the mask’s caster level is treated 
as two higher .
  This ability has no effect on the persona masks you create 
and use .
 Many Faces (Ex): At 5th level, you can wear more than 
one persona mask simultaneously . You can use the abilities 
of only one mask at a time, but you can switch between 
masks more quickly .
  While wearing a persona mask, you can don a second 
without taking off the first . The appearance and benefit of 
the second replace those of the first . As a move action, you 
can have the first mask appear instead, granting its effect 
in place of the other’s .
  At 8th level, you can wear up to three masks simultane-
ously and can switch masks as a swift action .
  At 10th level, you can wear up to four masks simultane-
ously and can switch masks as an immediate action .
  While wearing multiple persona masks in this way, you 
can remove any worn mask as a move action (regardless of 
which one is active) . 
 Hidden  Mask  (Su): Beginning at 6th level, you can 
make any mask you wear become invisible (or return an 
invisible mask to visibility) . Activating or deactivating this 
ability requires a swift action . The mask’s benefit applies 
regardless of whether it is visible .
PlaYI  ng a MasTer of Masks
Your  power  lies  in  your  talent  at  manipulating  reality 
through the secret knowledge of those who have come 
before . You are secure in the perfection of your artistry; 
masters of masks often adopt grandiose titles . When not in 
character—a rare occasion—your own personality might 


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
reflect either inner confidence or the aloofness and lack of 
direction that come from being without a role .
  Few others share your consummate skill in the perform-
ing arts . Some are teachers, others are rivals, and the rest 
to you are mere hacks, but all participate in an old and lit-
tle-understood tradition . This loose guild of like-minded 
thespians helps you refine your abilities, creating new per-
sonas and new powers, though mastery depends on intense 
practice and personal epiphanies . No  nperformers could 
never  understand  how  your  craft  submerges  you 
in a role so completely that the role becomes 
reality . 
Combat
Your role on the battlefield 
depends on your charac-
ter background and the 
masks you have created 
and mastered . If you pre-
fer stealth, you likely avoid 
detection  behind  the  face-
less mask and don the mask 
of the assassin to surprise your 
opponents . On the other hand, 
if you are a front-line combatant, 
you  might  wear  the  mask  of  the 
gladiator or the savage . The masks of 
the high priest and the lord help you 
bolster allies, while the mask of the de-
mon brings allies to your side . Those of 
the archmage and the dragon give you 
magical offensive power . Your versatil-
ity is your greatest strength .
advancement
You have always been intrigued by the mal-
leability of perceived truth: The most subtle 
hint,  emphasis,  or  rearrangement  of  facts 
can lead others to think and act exactly as 
you wish . You grew adept at becoming what 
you weren’t, either onstage or in the employ 
of  those  who  had  uses  for  such  a  talent . 
Eventually you discovered the fellowship of 
like artists who had been sculpting truth 
for  seemingly  as  long  as  civilization  has 
existed . You either sought them out yourself 
or were introduced by another who recognized 
your talents, and now you perfect the method 
of the masters of masks .
  Since you manipulate belief and perception, you must 
continue to improve skills related to this expertise, such as 
Bluff, Disguise, Perform (act), and Sense Motive . Interaction 
skill tricks (page 82) give you more options to exploit your 
talents . Your abilities range widely, depending on the masks 
you’ve constructed, so you might also take ranks in other 
skills that work with them . Feat choices likewise should 
improve your mastery of deception or amplify the benefits 
of your masks . 
resources
You receive no material aid from others who share your 
talents, but a measure of professional respect exists among 
peers dedicated to upholding the secrets of your art . Rather 
than a formal organization, fellowship in the acting profes-
sion is acknowledged among its members . A mentor 
might have trained you, or you are friendly with 
other masters of masks . Such allies can 
help you practice and refine your 
skills or suggest new masks . 
   A  single  rule  binds  mas-
ters of masks: One cannot use 
his abilities against another . 
Violation of this principle re-
sults in no physical or material 
penalty, but the offender is forever 
cut off from his fellows . His ill reputation 
precedes him throughout the acting 
community, which can result in fi-
nancial hardship . Most adhere strictly 
to this injunction, but in a profession 
that depends on warping reality, moral-
ity is flexible as well, and a few masters of 
masks pay this warning no heed .
MasTers of Masks  
In   The World
“How can both an angel and a demon exist 
in one body?”
—Apatura Iris, critic at the 
Free    City’s Grand Theatre
Thieves, spies, truth-benders, and mys-
terious figures, masters of masks cloak 
themselves within their roles and hide 
behind their elegant personas . Those 
who do not belong to their shrouded 
and ancient tradition have tremen-
dous  difficulty  learning  anything 
about their ranks or true powers . 
Thus, these master imperson-
ators add new layers of intrigue 
to  any  campaign,  as  well  as  a 
strange new kind of magic . 
organization
Masters of masks rarely form substantial organizations: 
Disputes over personal expression and technique, as well 
as clashes between egos, are barriers to cooperation . Those 
initiated into the class’s secrets acknowledge a loose fellow-
ship defined by their shared abilities . Still, many masters 
of masks see others as threats, rivals who could reveal their 
complex subterfuges to further their own ends . Masters 
Beriel,  
a master of masks
Illus. by R. Gallegos


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
of  masks  usually  ingratiate  themselves  with  groups  of 
wandering performers, con artists, or adventuring parties 
that need their duplicitous abilities .
nPC    reactions
Few know that masters of masks even exist, so the average 
person has no preexisting attitude toward them, even if 
one declares himself openly . Those who are aware of these 
truth-shapers treat them as exceptionally skilled actors, or 
perhaps as spies or assassins, and react accordingly . 
  Bards usually know of masters of masks and see them as 
incredibly talented performers . Their admiration borders 
on awe, so their attitude toward members of this class is 
typically friendly . Other spellcasters usually treat masters 
of masks with respect, out of interest in the strange magic 
these  roguish  actors  possess,  and  seek  interviews  and 
demonstrations at every opportunity . Their attitudes too 
tend toward friendly, though out of personal interest and 
curiosity .
  Those who hold positions of political or military author-
ity consider masters of masks to be dangerous spies . Any 
member of a lawful organization or of a secretive group 
fears and distrusts them, with a starting attitude no better 
than unfriendly .
MasTer of Masks lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can research 
masters of masks to learn more about them . When a charac-
ter succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is revealed, 
including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Masters of masks are actors and disguise artists 
who use masks in their performances and deceptions .
 DC 15: Masters of masks are spies just as often as they 
are entertainers .
 DC 20: A master of masks relies on different personas 
to use a wide repertoire of abilities, including many potent 
magical effects .
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific masters of masks in 
your campaign, including a notable individual and the title 
he goes by, the area in which he operates, and what masks 
he wears .
  Masters of masks are difficult to find . PCs wishing to 
make contact might inquire through the criminal under-
world or at local playhouses . A master of masks follows up 
if he is interested, or remains elusive otherwise .
MasTers of Masks In   The gaMe
The master of masks is perfect for players who are not 
satisfied with just one party role . Since each mask bestows 
a different ability, the prestige class is as versatile and varied 
as the player customizes it to be .
  As an NPC, a master of masks might be a consummate 
impersonator who is nearly impossible to pin down, or an 
expert agent in the employ of rivals .
adaptation
The master of masks is flexible enough to fit a variety of 
roles in nearly any campaign setting . One interpretation of 
the class might have a more sinister nature, with each mask 
drawing its abilities from trapped outsiders bound within . 
Masters of masks might be members of an organized group 
of  spies  or  assassins  in  the  service  of  an  unscrupulous 
government, arcane organization, or deceptive religion . 
Alternatively, masters of masks and their signature dis-
guises might be far rarer than suggested above . Perhaps 
each mask is unique, and a handful of masters compete 
to find a legendary mask, each hoping to make its powers 
his alone .
sample encounter
PCs might become embroiled in the plots of a master of 
masks for a variety of reasons, whether allied with him in 
pursuit of a shared goal, intrigued by his strange magic, or 
opposing some deception or infiltration .
 EL  10:  Five  years  ago  Rilvivin  Baralstol,  son  of  the 
infamous crime lord Rosscoul “Clamp” Baralstol, decided 
to seek his own fortune away from his family’s felonious 
business . A recent heist has put the criminal boss in pos-
session of embarrassing documents that implicate a local 
noble in some tawdry affair or caper, and now he is extort-
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
fI resIde Tale
“Sit. Sit down and hear my tale. I swear to you it is the honest 
truth, and Olidammara take my tongue if I stray but a few dozen 
yards from actual fact.
    “It was not long ago that I was a prettier girl—don’t snicker, 
you!—and could work my way into a nobleman’s house and go 
through  his  cabinets  with  nothing  more  than  a  wink,  a  smile, 
and a generously padded corset. Ah, those were the days. 
    “During my youth I spent as many nights in the arms of noble-
men as I could—I did not often sleep alone, I can tell you that! 
One night, I caught the eye of a particularly wealthy and foolish 
young lord (how often those traits coincide!). Lured by his os-
tentatious display of finery, I approached him and sent him into 
a world of joy with a slight brush of my lips.
    “This  foolish  lad  put  up  nary  a  struggle  as  I  led  him  into  a 
place quieter and lonelier than the furious press of the ballroom. 
As time wore on and he wore down, I coaxed him into gentle 
sleep  before  regaining  my  adornments  of  the  evening.  Once 
more able to endure public scrutiny, I brought with me the silly 
boy’s sword, hidden in the folds and bustles of my now-bulky 
dress.
    “That sword now hangs there, above the fireplace, released 
from the drudgery of service rendered to such an easily swayed 
man-child.”


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
ing that prominent citizen . The noble has hired Beriel, an 
egotistical but incredibly skilled actor, to pose as the newly 
returned Rilvivin and gain Rosscoul’s trust to steal back 
the documents . The PCs accompany Beriel to complete his 
disguise  as  authentic-looking  adventuring  companions . 
Beriel’s face has never been seen in public, and not even 
the actor’s employer knows whether the master of masks 
is a male or a female .
Beriel CR 10
Human rogue 7/master of masks 3
CG Medium humanoid
Init +6; Senses Listen +6, Spot +6
Languages Celestial, Common, Elven, Halfling
AC 15, touch 13, flat-footed 15; Dodge, Mobility, uncanny 
dodge
 (+2 Dex, +2 shield, +1 deflection)
hp 38 (10 HD)
Resist	evasion
Fort +3, Ref +10, Will +6
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee +1 keen dagger +6 (1d8–1/17–20)
Ranged +1 keen dagger +9 (1d8–1/17–20)
Base	Atk	+6; Grp	+5
Atk	Options sneak attack +4d6
Special	Actions persona masks (angel, assassin, lord, jester)
Combat	Gear potion of cat’s grace
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 14, Con 10, Int 16, Wis 12, Cha 16
SQ mask specialist, trap sense +2, trapfinding
Feats Deceitful, Dodge, Improved Initiative, Mobility, 
 Persuasive
Skills Appraise +12, Balance +9, Bluff +18, Climb +5, Diplo-
macy +14, Disguise +18 (+20 acting), Forgery +7, Gather 
Information +8, Intimidate +5, Jump +1, Knowledge (local) 
+14, Listen +6, Open Lock +7, Perform (act) +16, Perform 
(dance) +5, Perform (oratory) +6, Perform (wind instru-
ments) +5, Search +11, Sense Motive +6, Sleight of Hand 
+11, Spot +6, Survival +1 (+3 following tracks), Tumble 
+12, Use Magic Device +8 
Possessions combat gear plus +1 keen dagger, ring of force 
shield, ring of protection +1, dust of disappearance, master-
work flute, masterwork thieves’ tools, noble’s outfit, 
sunrod, 3 smokesticks
MounTebank
“The best defense is to never let an enemy see your true self.”
—Laughing Cedric, mountebank
Mountebanks are frauds and con artists, capable of slipping 
into new identities as others change clothing . While they 
can fit in just about anywhere they go, they are also adept 
at getting out of tight situations .
beCoMI  ng a MounTebank
Bards are the most likely to branch into the mountebank 
prestige class . Their versatile skill selection enables them to 
meet the class’s Knowledge and Spellcraft requirements and 
to develop other skills . In addition, the bard’s spellcasting 
ability enhances the mountebank’s class features .
  Rogues, sorcerers, and spellthieves sometimes become 
mountebanks  to  improve  their  battlefield  mobility  or 
to enhance existing talents of deception . Spellthief plus 
mountebank makes an excellent class combination for char-
acters who fight creatures that use spell-like abilities .
Entry Requirements
Alignment: Any nonlawful.
Skills: Bluff 8 ranks, Knowledge (arcana), (local), or 
(psionics) 4 ranks, Spellcraft 4 ranks. 
Feats: Deceitful.
Class fea Tures
This prestige class is all about deception in combat . As you 
advance, you develop sneak attack in addition to enhancing 
your Bluff skill, which keeps your opponents flat-footed . By 
the time you reach the apex of the class, you can transport 
yourself about the battlefield as you please, preventing your 
opponents from effectively fighting you .
 Tongue of the Devil (Ex): Your cunning misdirection 
leaves others at your mercy . You add your Intelligence bonus 
(if any) to Bluff checks .
 Sneak  Attack  (Ex): Beginning at 2nd level, you deal 
an extra 1d6 points of damage when you are flanking an 
opponent or at any time when the target would be denied 
its Dexterity bonus . See the rogue class feature, PH 50   . 
The extra damage dealt by your sneak attack increases to 
2d6 at 5th level and to 3d6 at 8th level . If you get a sneak 
attack bonus from another source (such as rogue levels), 
the bonuses on damage stack .
 Alter  Ego  (Sp): Starting at 3rd level, you establish an 
alternate identity . This alter ego has its own distinct physi-
cal characteristics, quirks, preferred clothing, and so on . 
At will, you can switch your form between that of your 
normal identity and that of your alter ego. This ability works 
like the alter self spell, except that you can assume only the 
Table 2–12: The Mountebank  Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special
1st +0 +0 +2 +0 Tongue of the devil 
2nd +1   +0 +3 +0 Sneak attack +1d6
3rd +2 +1   +3 +1   Alter ego
4th +3 +1   +4 +1   Sideslip 1/day
5th +3 +1   +4 +1   Sneak attack +2d6
6th +4 +2 +5 +2 Alter ego, 
     sideslip 2/day
7th +5 +2 +5 +2 Slippery mind
8th +6 +2 +6 +2 Sideslip 3/day, 
     sneak attack +3d6
9th +6 +3 +6 +3 Alter ego
10th +7   +3 +7   +3 Sideslip 4/day, 
     sudden escape
Class	Skills	(4 	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Appraise, Bluff, 
Concentration, Diplomacy, Disguise, Escape Artist, Forgery, 
Intimidate, Jump, Knowledge (arcana), Knowledge (local), 
Knowledge (psionics), Listen, Sense Motive, Sleight of 
Hand, Spellcraft, Spot, Tumble.


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
appearance of your alternate identity . Your caster level for 
this ability is equal to your mountebank class level .
  As you advance in this prestige class, you develop addi-
tional alter egos, gaining a new one every three levels beyond 
1st (two at 6th and three at 9th) .
 Sideslip  (Su):  Beginning  at  4th  level,  you  become 
supernaturally elusive . Once per day as an immediate 
action, you can transfer yourself from your current space 
to another up to 20 feet away . This ability otherwise works 
like  the dimension  door  spell,  except  that  you  cannot 
transport other creatures with you . At 6th level, and at 
every two levels thereafter, you gain an additional daily 
use of sideslip .
 Slippery Mind (Ex): Starting at 7th level, whenever you 
are affected by an enchantment spell or effect and you fail 
your saving throw, you can attempt it again 1 round later 
at the same DC . You get only one extra chance to succeed 
on your save using this ability .
 Sudden Escape (Sp): Beginning at 10th level, you can 
expend two daily uses of your sideslip ability as a swift 
action to use dimension door, as the spell . Your caster level 
is equal to your character level .
PlaYI  ng a MounTebank
Shrewd and quick-witted, you construct numerous false 
identities to keep your enemies off balance and do whatever 
it takes to complete your mission . With your ability to 
assume a flawless disguise and to slip away if the situation 
sours,  you  are  nearly  impossible  to  pin  down .  You  are 
confident, irreverent, even insolent .
Combat
You’re  certainly  no  front-line  fighter,  but  you  have  the 
potential  to  deal  considerable  damage  against  enemies 
who never see it coming . Your work best with teammates, 
maneuvering to get flanks and help bring down opponents 
with your sneak attacks . Use your sideslip ability to pop 
around  the  battlefield,  slipping  in  and  out  to  distract 
opponents while the real heavy hitters in your group mop 
them up .
advancement
You were born to become a mountebank . Prior to enter-
ing the prestige class, you were probably a ne’er-do-well, 
a daring rogue and adventurer . The mountebank’s deceit 
and elusiveness let you express yourself fully in the only 
way you know .
  Now you have at least one alternate identity to maintain 
cover  and  to  put  distance  between  who  you  really  are 
and how you want others to perceive you . An alter ego is 
especially useful for brokering secret deals with unsavory 
types, letting you keep “your” hands clean .
  As you advance in the class, continue to max out your 
ranks  in  Bluff,  and  invest  skill  points  in  Disguise  and 
Sleight of Hand . Ambush feats (page 71) and many feats 
in the Complete Adventurer supplement make the most of 
your sneak attacks . Improved Feint is an excellent choice 
with your expertise in Bluff, and Combat Reflexes lets you 
take advantage of your battlefield repositioning to land 
unexpected  attacks .  Deft  Strike  and  Expert  Tactician, 
both from Complete  Adventurer, are good choices . If you 
play up the infiltrator aspect of this class, consider magic 
(or psionic) items that help you cloak your true intentions, 
such as an amulet of proof against detection and location.
resources
Under your various identities, you could belong to several 
organizations,  taking  advantage  of  the  benefits  derived 
from each . You might even join opposing groups, selling 
information from one side to the other, whether for noble 
or selfish ends . At heart, though, you are a loner . You exploit 
an organization only for as long as it offers you some benefit, 
then abandon it when it ceases to be useful .
MounTebanks In   The World
“It’s  all  smiles  and  pleasantries  until  a  knife  ends  up  in  your 
back.”
—Cralbus, high priest of Dispater
A mountebank’s chaotic tendencies and ability to mask his 
appearance enables him to infiltrate cults and other secre-
tive organizations, to learn more about them and ultimately 
find their weak points . Those who serve the cause of good 
are invaluable in the fight against evil . On the other hand, 
wicked mountebanks use their deceptive abilities to spread 
discord and suffering .
organization
Mountebanks are not attached to any particular organiza-
tion   . Many operate in several, often contradictory groups, 
working to bring them down from inside . Good mounte-
banks infiltrate cults devoted to devils and demons, while 
evil ones slip inside good-aligned religious organizations, 
working to dissolve the clergy from within .
nPC    reactions
Since mountebanks develop multiple personalities to move 
freely within communities, reactions to a given individual 
depend on the nature of the persona he assumes . Those 
within an infiltrated group see him as an ally and colleague, 
and react positively as long as he maintains his cover . If the 
mountebank’s true nature is revealed, he finds less than 
a warm welcome . People do not like to be deceived, and 
NPCs who discover they have been fooled by a mountebank 
are unfriendly or hostile . Indeed, an evil or overzealous 
organization might kill the unmasked infiltrator .
MounTebank lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can research 
mountebanks to learn more about them . When a character 
succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is revealed, 
including the information from lower DCs .


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
 DC 10: Mountebanks are con artists and varlets, a thor-
oughly untrustworthy lot .
 DC 15: What separates a mountebank from a common 
charlatan is his ability to switch personas . A mountebank 
can have several alter egos .
 DC 20: Mountebanks are hard to capture . Not only do 
they avoid being connected to anything, they also have a 
knack for slipping out of impossible situations .
  Player characters trying to locate a mountebank must 
succeed on a DC 20 Gather In-
formation  check  to  locate 
someone who can set up a 
meeting .  It’s  entirely  pos-
sible  that  the  contact  is 
the  mountebank  himself, 
though he might never re-
veal his true identity .
MounTebanks 
In   The gaMe
Mountebanks can easily fit 
into an ongoing campaign, 
since they can pass for any-
one—even  established 
NPCs .  A  long-standing 
ally  could  secretly  be  a 
mountebank who works 
against  his  own  or  an-
other organization, using 
the PCs as a source of in-
formation .  Alternatively,  a 
character  whom  the  PCs  re-
gard as a villain might be in fact 
a double agent who has infiltrated 
an evil organization .
   The mountebank prestige class is a great 
non-evil alternative to the assassin . It is par-
ticularly attractive to players who like versatility 
and adaptability . In game terms, the pres-
tige class offers a mechanical advantage 
when  interacting  with  NPCs .  In  ro-
leplaying terms, the class’s toolkit is 
tailor-made for fighting insidious evil . 
In a campaign that centers on foiling a dastardly plot, the 
mountebank gives rogues specialized abilities to fight hid-
den masterminds . 
   If a campaign includes a mountebank PC, the DM should 
provide opportunities for him to use his alter ego ability . 
Perhaps someone he crossed in the past has learned of his 
true identity, forcing him to spend more and more time in 
his alternate personas . Challenge the PCs with dangerous 
plots requiring subterfuge and deception; mountebanks 
can come up with plans that can get the party in the door 
without resorting to hack-and-slash combat .
adaptation
The mountebank class has the strongest appeal to rogues 
and similar characters with social expertise, but it offers 
little to spellcasting characters . To make this class appeal 
to  intrigue-loving  spellcasters,  remove  its  sneak  attack 
class feature . Instead, the character gains one level of an 
existing  spellcasting  class  at  each  level  that  ordinarily 
grants sneak attack damage . In this way, he can load up on 
more enchantment, illusion, and transformation magic to 
enhance the class’s misdirection talents .
sample encounter
PCs  might  encounter  a  mountebank  in  one  of  his 
many guises .
 EL 10: Laughing Cedric is a knave and 
a cheat . He was always interested in 
magic and dabbled in spellcasting 
a bit, but lacked the discipline 
to make a serious go of it . In-
stead, he has become adept at 
snatching spells and magi-
cal abilities from those he 
encounters . 
   For a while, this tactic 
worked  well .  The  spells 
he  filched  allowed  him 
to  further  his  larcenous 
nature without having to 
work hard . One day, he tar-
geted  a  passing  individual 
whom he took for a wizard . 
Much  to  Cedric’s  surprise, 
the spell he seized was unfa-
miliar—and  thoroughly  evil . 
Terrified,  he  released  the  spell’s 
energy  without  casting  it .  The 
“wizard”  fled,  disappearing  into 
the streets .
   Cedric lay low for a while, hoping 
his victim would forgive the mistake, but not long after-
ward strange things started occurring . He was followed 
by black-robed people wearing queer masks . His rooms 
were searched, and his friends began to vanish . 
  Cedric can’t report what he has learned to the authorities, 
since knowledge of his “hobby” could land him in legal 
trouble . He had to get away quickly, so Cedric invented 
“Philden Phrent,” a minor oil merchant from a nearby city . 
He wears the merchant’s identity in public while he tries to 
uncover who and what he made the mistake of robbing . 
 Cedric works at a small stall in the marketplace during 
the day . So far he has learned that the “wizard” is in fact a 
cultist of the archdevil Mammon . He needs help to destroy 
the cult, so he’s on the lookout for a group of adventurers 
to back him up .
Laughing Cedric,  
a mountebank
Illus. by W. Mahy

0
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Laughing Cedric CR 10
Male half-elf spellthief 5/mountebank 5
CN Medium humanoid (elf )
Init +2; Senses low-light vision; Listen +4, Spot +4
Languages Common, Draconic, Elven, Infernal
AC 16, touch 12, flat-footed 14
 (+2 Dex, +2 armor, +2 natural)
hp 38 (10 HD)
Immune sleep
Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +4 (+6 against enchantments); +1 against 
spells 
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee mwk light mace +8/+3 (1d6+1)
Ranged	mwk light crossbow +9 (1d8/19–20)
Base	Atk	+6; Grp	+7
Atk	Options Combat Expertise, Improved Feint, sneak 
attack +4d6, steal energy resistance 10, steal spell (2nd, 
maximum 5 levels), steal spell effect (CL 8th, maximum 5 
minutes), steal spell-like ability
Special	Actions sideslip 1/day
Spellthief	Spells	Known (CL 2nd):
 1st (1/day)—shield, silent image (DC 15)
Spell-Like	Abilities (CL 5th):
 At will—alter ego (as alter self, Philden Phrent only)
 4/day—detect magic
Abilities	Str 12, Dex 14, Con 10, Int 14, Wis 8, Cha 18
SQ trapfinding
Feats Combat Expertise, Deceitful, Improved Feint, Sly For-
tune*
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Balance +9, Bluff +19, Concentration +4, Diplomacy 
+10, Disguise +9 (+11 acting), Escape Artist +7, Forgery 
+8, Gather Information +6, Hide +7, Intimidate +11, Jump 
+8, Knowledge (arcana) +7, Listen +4, Move Silently +6, 
Search +3, Sense Motive +4, Sleight of Hand +9, Spellcraft 
+8, Spot +4, Tumble +12, Use Magic Device +10, Use Rope 
+2 (+4 involving bindings)
SQ trapfinding
Possessions masterwork light mace, masterwork light cross-
bow with 10 bolts, amulet of natural armor +2, bracers of 
armor +2, cloak of Charisma +2
Ps Ibond agenT
“Now I see you, now I see through you.”
—Dieste Karisa, psibond agent
A psibond agent sees through the eyes of others, gently 
guiding  (or  in  some  cases  forcefully  commanding)  her 
puppet to go places she could never enter herself .
beCoMI  ng a PsIbond agenT
Most psibond agents begin as rogues, though a few ninjas 
and bards also enter the prestige class . Such individuals 
commonly draw the needed psionic power from the Wild 
Talent feat, but some psibond agents belong to naturally 
psionic  races  (such  as  the  kalashtar  from  the EbErron 
campaign setting), and others take some levels in a psionic 
class, usually lurk or telepath psion .
Entry Requirements
Skills: Gather Information 8 ranks, Sense Motive 4 ranks.
Languages: Any three.
Psionics: Power point reserve of at least 1.
Special: Sneak attack +1d6.
Class fea Tures
A psibond agent starts as an effective spy but eventually 
can influence or even control the minds of others through 
a powerful telepathic link .
 Psibond (Su): As a member of this class, you know how 
to create a mental link between yourself and a subject . 
You must be psionically focused to forge the psibond, but 
afterward you can expend your focus as needed to use 
other abilities . Establishing a psibond requires a standard 
action, and an unwilling subject is allowed a Will save 
(DC   10 + your psibond agent level + your Cha modifier) 
to resist . Once established, a psibond lasts as long as you 
concentrate, up to a maximum of 1 minute per class level . 
The maximum range at which a psibond can be established 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
leTT  er of requesT
To Kolven “the Poet,” master of the Forbidden Craft and Creator 
of Fear: 
    My boss, Tosey “Sharkarms” Guyver, leader of the Slaughter-
house Guild, extends his greetings and most sincere commen-
dations on your skill. I will not insult you by declaring my name, 
for I am unimportant.
    Only my boss can even approach your greatness. I say “ap-
proach,” for he knows that you are unequaled in your craft. We 
know  of  your  exploits  to  the  south—how  you  eliminated  Baron 
Longacre  with  a  spoon  as  he  supped  in  a  crowded  room.  That 
and other accomplishments you have performed leaves my boss 
greatly  moved  and  deeply  impressed.  You  are  truly  a  singular 
power in this world, and one worthy of respect from the gods 
themselves.
    While this letter would be justified in simply listing and prais-
ing your many inspiring acts, it has a secondary intent, which I 
shall relate to you now. As you undoubtedly know, artisan as you 
are of the Forbidden Craft, my organization is in a war against 
the most damnable foes: the Dead Rabbits gang. These thugs 
dared attack us without reason on our own turf, killing a number 
of our companions in cold blood.
    For  this  reason  my  boss,  Tosey  Guyver,  humbly  begs  your 
services in the quiet retirement of the Dead Rabbits’ leadership. 
He hopes you might forgive him this request and the humble 
and probably insulting gift he has appended to it in the form of 
a small bag of gems. If you desire another form of recompense, 
please let it be known, and the Slaughterhouse Guild will extend 
it to you.
    Thank you for your time.
    K.H. 

1
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
is 100 feet, but once in place it persists even if the subject 
moves out of this range (the psibond is suppressed, but not 
broken, while the subject is on a different plane) . A psibond 
grants you various options for gathering information or 
controlling the subject, based on your class level .
 Forced Sense Link: At 1st level, you can use a swift action to 
perceive what the subject perceives using its sight, hearing, 
taste, or smell . This sense link lasts until you take another 
swift action to end it, or until the psibond’s duration ends . 
Only one sense is linked, and you cannot switch between 
senses with the same psibond . You make any skill checks 
involving senses, such as Spot or Listen, as if you were the 
subject (using that individual’s skill modifiers), and as if 
you were in the subject’s location . You lose your Dexterity 
bonus to AC while directly sensing what the subject senses . 
This ability otherwise works like the forced sense link power 
(Expanded Psionics Handbook 131)    .
 Nudge: Beginning at 2nd level, you can subtly influence 
the subject of your psibond . As an immediate action, you 
can implant a subtle suggestion about which course of 
action the subject takes if presented with a choice . You 
cannot communicate any specific action to your subject; 
you can only nudge it toward a specific choice . For example, 
if your subject is offered a choice of shifts for the night 
watch, you can suggest which one to take . No saving throw 
applies against this effect, but if the suggested action pres-
ents any obvious danger to the subject, your nudge fails; the 
psibond isn’t broken . You can’t implant the same nonverbal 
suggestion more than once during the same psibond .
 Empathy: At 4th level, you can detect the surface emotions 
of the subject of your psibond as a free action . You also gain 
a +2 insight bonus on any Bluff, Diplomacy, Intimidate, or 
Sense Motive check made against that subject as long as 
the psibond is in place .
 Suggestion: Beginning at 6th level, you can use a swift 
action to use suggestion (as the spell) on the subject of your 
psibond . The subject is allowed a Will save (DC 13 + your 
Cha modifier) to resist the effect . You can’t use this ability 
more than once during the same psibond .
 False Sensory Input: At 8th level, you gain a limited abil-
ity to falsify one of the senses of your psibond’s subject . 
This requires a swift action to activate or maintain each 
round,  and  otherwise  works  like  the false  sensory  input 
power (Expanded Psionics Handbook 106), though no save is 
allowed .
 Dominate:  At  10th  level,  you  gain  the  ability  to  fully 
control the subject of your psibond . This works like the 
dominate  monster spell (PH 224) and requires a standard 
action to activate . The subject is allowed a Will save (DC 19 
+ your Cha modifier) to resist the effect . If you successfully 
dominate the subject, the effect lasts for 1 hour . Using this 
ability automatically ends your psibond with the subject, 
regardless of whether it succeeds on the save .
 Sneak Attack (Ex): Beginning at 3rd level, you deal an 
extra 1d6 points of damage when flanking an opponent or 
any time the target would be denied its Dexterity bonus . 
See the rogue class feature, PH 50  . The extra damage dealt 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
geTTIng ahead
To the cleric of Olidammara, head of the Dead Rabbits gang:
    You will find in the box that accompanies this note a particu-
larly gruesome but I trust nonetheless inspiring gift. I present 
it to you in good faith not as a threat, but as a way of showing 
my thanks for a previous act of beneficence you once showed 
me but have probably by now forgotten. 
    When I was a child, you came to my village for reasons that 
are your own. There you acted as a merchant selling your wares, 
but it was whispered that you were in fact a priest in the service 
of the Laughing Rogue. At the time, I suffered in terrible illness 
and pain, and my destitute and heartbroken mother (may the 
gods  grant  her  soul  peace)  came  to  you  begging  for  aid.  She 
had no coin to offer and was not as comely as the fair maidens 
to whom you usually gave your gentle ministrations. Despite all 
that, you cured me of my illness and complimented my mother 
on her nonexistent beauty. For that, she died praising you and 
Olidammara. 
    Though I never learned your name, I have not forgotten your 
kindness.  In  repayment  I  offer  to  you  the  head  of  a  rival  who 
sought me out to do unto you what I have done unto him. I be-
lieve the Slaughterhouse Guild these days lives up to its name. 
 My debt to you is repaid, yet know that no amount of gold will 
ever bring me to darken your doorstep in threat.
    Kolven “the Poet”
Table 2–13: The Psibond Agent    Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special
1st +0 +0 +2 +0 Psibond (forced 
     sense link)
2nd +1 +0 +3 +0 Psibond (nudge)
3rd +2 +1 +3 +1 Sneak attack +1d6
4th +3 +1 +4 +1 Psibond (empathy)
5th +3 +1 +4 +1 Lingering psibond
6th +4 +2 +5 +2 Psibond (suggestion), 
     sneak attack +2d6
7th +5 +2 +5 +2 Double psibond
8th +6 +2 +6 +2 Psibond (false 
     sensory input)
9th +6 +3 +6 +3 Sneak attack +3d6
10th +7 +3 +7 +3 Psibond (dominate)
Class	Skills	(6	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Appraise, Balance, 
Bluff, Climb, Concentration, Craft, Decipher Script, 
Diplomacy, Disable Device, Disguise, Escape Artist, Forgery, 
Gather Information, Hide, Intimidate, Jump, Knowledge 
(local), Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Perform, Profession, 
Search, Sense Motive, Sleight of Hand, Speak Language, 
Spot, Swim, Tumble, Use Psionic Device, Use Rope.

2
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
increases to 2d6 at 6th level and to 3d6 at 9th level . If you 
get a sneak attack bonus from another source (such as rogue 
levels), the bonuses on damage stack .
 Lingering  Psibond  (Su): When you attain 5th level, 
your  psibond  becomes  more  powerful .  Your  psibond 
remains in place for 1 round after you cease concentrat-
ing   . If you resume concentration in the next round, you 
retain  the  psibond’s  effect  as  if  you  had  never  stopped 
concentrating .
 Double Psibond (Su): At 7th level, you learn the secret 
of maintaining two psibonds simultaneously . Each psibond 
must be established separately against a different subject, 
but your concentration maintains both links equally well . 
Using any special abilities through the links must be done 
separately (for example, establishing a forced sense link 
requires a separate swift action for each subject) . 
PlaYI  ng a PsIbond agenT
Others exist to be your pawns . Strangers (and sometimes 
acquaintances) serve best as puppets through whom you can 
observe and manipulate the world . Even friends—if you 
have any—might benefit from the occasional nudge . Take 
care, however, not to use your abilities on your traveling 
companions too often, lest they lose their trust and leave 
you helpless .
  Although  you  work  well  on  your  own  and  make  no 
apologies for your actions, you appreciate the company 
of psions and rogues and tolerate the presence of others . 
Indeed, exploiting the skills of your companions keeps you 
protected in dangerous situations .
Combat
You serve two distinct roles in combat . You gather informa-
tion before the actual outbreak of conflict, and in the early 
rounds of battle you try to manipulate your pawn into a 
position that is advantageous to you and your comrades . 
Once you have set up the battle to your liking, you try to 
deliver your sneak attack, as any rogue would .
advancement
You’ve needed to take control from an early age . In your 
youth, you tried to manipulate friends into giving you gifts 
or acceding to your wishes . As you matured, your manipula-
tions grew more deft, and you learned to tap more deeply 
into your psionic abilities . 
  You excel in subtly taking charge of a situation . As you 
advance  in  this  prestige  class,  focus  on  enhancing  the 
talents that make you most effective . Add ranks to Bluff, 
Hide, and Move Silently to help you get out of trouble 
should your psibond fail you . Consider picking up a psionic 
feat or two, such as Psionic Weapon or Speed of Thought 
(both from Expanded Psionics Handbook), to enhance your 
combat prowess . The new ambush feats in Chapter 3 also 
provide a variety of interesting twists on your normal sneak 
attack, especially Mind Drain for dealing with other psionic 
characters .
resources
Outside of your very small circle of adventuring compan-
ions, you belong to no organization . In times of need, you 
can acquire resources from your pawns, although you rarely 
do so . You are self-sufficient and independent: Receiving 
aid from someone, even if you know it was not his own 
idea, gives him power over you .
Ps Ibond agenTs  In   The World
“I don’t know how she knew that. It’s almost as if she was listening 
to my conversation.”
—Argus Coopson, bewildered pawn
Consummate  loners  and  master  manipulators,  psibond 
agents fit smoothly into any campaign that includes psion-
Dieste Karisa, a psibond agent
Illus. by M. Coimbra


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
ics  . You can easily introduce a psibond agent as the power 
behind the throne: a trusted advisor who actually controls 
a tribe, city, or nation through her puppet . Less sinister 
examples include a mysterious wanderer who always seems 
to get the best of any situation, a quiet tavern regular who 
receives every meal on the house, or an obnoxious tagalong 
who always seems to know what you’re up to .
organization
Psibond agents do not form organizations and chafe at the 
notion of joining them, confident in their own abilities and 
the exploitation of others’ . A psibond agent whose talents 
are known, even to only a few, is inundated with requests 
to join guilds, schools, or conclaves competing to put her 
talents to use . She acquiesces to such offers only to gain 
control of an organization through direct manipulation of 
its leaders, even as they believe she serves them .
nPC    reactions
Most people never realize they have met a psibond agent, 
nor do they know that they have been manipulated by one 
(even if they take actions that are out of character) . Nobody 
likes to be controlled, so when a psibond agent is revealed 
she can expect violent hostility, regardless of whether she 
actually used her abilities on the people who uncover her . 
More enlightened and experienced members of society 
temper their fear with reason, but they are still unfriendly 
toward a known psibond agent . Other psionic characters 
(especially telepaths) treat a psibond agent with indiffer-
ence, seeing her abilities as no more dangerous than their 
own   .  Only  members  of  the  criminal  underground  and 
those who wish to exploit her talents extend a friendly 
greeting—even if it is feigned . 
Ps Ibond agenT lore
Characters  with  ranks  in  Knowledge  (psionics)  can 
research psibond agents to learn more about them . When 
a character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Psibond agents combine psychic powers with 
stealth and secrecy .
 DC 15: Psibond agents can hear what you hear and see 
what you see .
 DC 20: Psibond agents can manipulate you with sug-
gestions and hints . The most powerful ones can actually 
control your body .
 DC 30:  Characters  who  achieve  this  level  of  success 
can learn important details about specific psibond agents 
in  your  campaign,  including  a  notable  individual,  the 
area in which she operates, and the kinds of activities she 
undertakes .
  As a rule, psibond agents don’t want to be found . Uncover-
ing one requires following up on rumors of people acting 
strangely, as well as a successful Gather Information check 
(DC   20 + target’s psibond agent level) . 
Ps Ibond agenTs  In   The gaMe
Since psibond agents are independent operators, introduc-
ing them does not require adding a new organization to 
your campaign or even a new character archetype . In a 
campaign featuring psionics, telepaths already manipulate 
the minds of others; the psibond agent merely adds some 
of those abilities to a rogue . Psibond agents could form an 
extremist faction of mind-controlling telepaths or work to 
hunt other psionic characters .
  Players who enjoy the role of the mysterious loner or who 
like taking control should enjoy playing psibond agents . 
Telepaths, obviously, are drawn to the prestige class, as are 
psionic characters who seek new ways to attacking other 
psionics-using  creatures .  Such  independent  characters 
can clash with a party’s group goals, however, so be sure 
to provide opportunities to encourage cooperation .
adaptation
If your campaign doesn’t include psionics, you can read-
ily adapt this prestige class to arcane magic . A group of 
enchanters can easily take the role of psibond agents, which 
requires only replacing the power point requirement with 
the ability to cast 1st-level arcane spells . 
sample encounter
Encountering a psibond agent is often not obvious . The 
PCs might “meet” one watching them through the eyes 
of another person, never knowing of her presence . Alter-
natively, they might come across a psibond agent whose 
thoughts are literally elsewhere, making her unaware of 
her  surroundings .  Usually,  PCs  knowingly  come  into 
contact with a psibond agent only when she instigates the 
meeting . 
 EL 12: Dieste Karisa has a childlike sense of right and 
wrong . During the day, she is dull and sleepy, barely hold-
ing onto her job in a small bookstore . At night, Dieste 
watches . When she sees something she doesn’t like, she 
makes it stop . The PCs might stumble onto her directly or 
indirectly while she is watching, or they might find her 
in the middle of psychic battle, punishing those who prey 
on the weak and powerless . Whether they aid her or her 
opponent depends on the situation and their own ideas 
about vigilante justice .
Dieste Karisa CR 12
Female half-elf psion (telepath) 5/spellthief 1/psibond agent 6 
NG Medium humanoid (elf )
Init +2; Senses low-light vision; Listen +11, Spot +11
Languages	Common, Abyssal, Aquan, Auran, Celestial, 
Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, Giant, Gnoll, Gnome, Goblin, 
Ignan, Infernal, Orc, Sylvan, Terran, Undercommon
AC 13, touch 12, flat-footed 11
 (+2 Dex, +1 natural)
hp 50 (12 HD)
Immune sleep
Fort +4, Ref +8, Will +8 (+10 against enchantments)


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee	mwk dagger +6/+1 (1d4–1/19–20) 
Ranged mwk dagger +9 (1d4–1/19–20)
Base	Atk	+6; Grp	+5
Atk	Options sneak attack +3d6, steal power points (1), steal 
spell (1st, maximum 1 levels)
Special	Actions psibond (empathy, forced sense link, nudge, 
suggestion)
Combat	Gear dorje of force screen*
 *Item described in Expanded Psionics Handbook
Power	Points/Day: 44;	Powers	Known* (ML 5th; 1d20+9 to 
overcome psionic resistance):
3rd—dispel psionics, hostile empathic transfer (DC 20), 
psionic blast (DC 20)
2nd—brain lock (DC 19), ego whip (DC 19), read thoughts 
(DC 19)
1st—far hand, force screen, inertial armor, mindlink 
(DC 18), psionic charm (DC 18)
 *Powers described in Expanded Psionics Handbook
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 14, Con 12, Int 22, Wis 10, Cha 13
SQ lingering psibond, trapfinding
Feats Combat Manifestation*, Power Penetration*, Psionic 
Talent* [3], Psithief**
 *Feats described in Expanded Psionics Handbook
 **New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Bluff +16, Concentration +16, Diplomacy +7, Disguise 
+1 (+3 acting), Gather Information +18, Intimidate +12, 
Knowledge (psionics) +16, Listen +11, Psicraft +16, Search 
+7, Sense Motive +12, Speak Language (10), Spot +11 
Possessions	combat gear plus masterwork dagger, amulet 
of natural armor +1, headband of intellect +4, psionatrix of 
telepathy* 
 *Item described in Expanded Psionics Handbook
Psibond	(Su) Duration 6 minutes; Will DC 17 negates. Against 
the suggestion effect, Will DC 14 resists.
sP ellWar  P snIP er
“Oppose  me,  and  I  shall  show  you  whole  new  universes  of 
pain.”
—Tessa Senchan, master spellwarp sniper
The spellwarp sniper contorts spells, changing area effects 
into rays that deliver precise, devastating attacks . 
beCoMI  ng a sP ellWar  P snIP er
Every spellwarp sniper has at least one level of rogue, ninja, 
spellthief, or some other class that grants the sneak attack 
or sudden strike class feature, which is a prerequisite for 
the prestige class . At her heart, however, a spellwarp sniper 
is a spellcaster of respectable skill, usually of arcane origin . 
Occasionally a divine caster (such as a cleric dedicated to a 
deity of destruction) enters this class .
Entry Requirements
Skills: Concentration 8 ranks, Spellcraft 8 ranks. 
Feat: Point Blank Shot.
Spellcasting: Ability to cast 3rd-level spells. 
Special: Sneak attack or sudden strike +1d6. 
Class fea Tures
A spellwarp sniper can alter the way certain spells work, 
turning  them  into  precision  weapons  that  target  vital 
locations .
 Spellcasting: At each level, you gain new spells per 
day and an increase in caster level (and spells known, if 
applicable) as if you had also gained a level in a spellcasting 
class to which you belonged before adding the prestige 
class level . You do not, however, gain any other benefit a 
character of that class would have gained . If you had more 
than one spellcasting class before becoming a spellwarp 
sniper, you must decide to which class to add each level for 
the purpose of determining spells per day, caster level, and 
spells known .
 Spellwarp (Ex): You can alter the form of certain area 
spells into rays as you cast them . As a free action, you can 
warp a 1st-level area spell with instantaneous duration and 
a range greater than touch . The spell’s level, components, 
range, and damage (if any) remain unchanged . However, the 
spell’s area entry is replaced by an effect entry of “ray .” 
  The spell acts in all ways as a ray, and is considered a ray 
for the purpose of effects that modify or depend on rays 
(such as the other abilities of this prestige class) . You must 
succeed on a ranged touch attack to affect an opponent with 
the spell . Even if the original spell allowed a Reflex save to 
reduce or negate its effect, the ray does not . However, if the 
original spell allowed a Fortitude or Will save to reduce or 
negate the spell’s effect, the save still applies .
  You must decide to warp the spell as you cast it . You 
do not need to prepare it as a warped spell . You can apply 
metamagic feats as normal to the spell, as long as they can 
affect ray spells .
  Each time you advance a level in this class, the maximum 
level  of  spell  that  you  can  affect  increases  by  one .  For 
example, a 3rd-level spellwarp sniper can warp spells of 
up to 3rd level .
 Sudden Raystrike (Ex): If you can catch an opponent 
when he is unable to defend himself effectively from your 
ray attack, you can strike a vital spot for extra damage . 
Whenever the target of one of your ray spells is denied a 
Dexterity bonus to AC (whether the target actually has a 
Dexterity bonus of not), you deal an extra 1d6 points of 
damage with your ray spell . (If your ray spell doesn’t deal 
hit point damage, this extra damage doesn’t apply .) At 4th 
level, the extra damage increases to 2d6 . If you get a sneak 
attack or sudden strike bonus from another source (such 
as  rogue  or  ninja  levels),  the  bonuses  on  damage  stack 
whenever both abilities would apply to the same target . 
  This  damage  applies  only  to  targets  within  30  feet . 
Creatures with concealment, creatures without discernible 
anatomies, and creatures immune to extra damage from 
critical hits are all immune to your sudden raystrikes .
 Precise  Shot: At 3rd level, you gain Precise Shot as a 
bonus feat . If you already have Precise Shot, you can select 
any other feat that has Point Blank Shot as a prerequisite, 
as long as you meet the prerequisite for the chosen feat .


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
 Ray  Mastery  (Ex): At 5th level, you attain unequaled 
control over your ray spells . This control manifests in three 
ways    .
•  You can apply the extra damage from the sudden raystrike 
ability (as well as any additional sneak attack or sudden 
strike damage from other sources) to ray attacks against a 
target within 60 feet, instead of 30 feet .
•  You can deliver a coup de grace with a ray spell that deals 
hit point damage . You must be adjacent to your target to 
deliver the coup de grace .
•  Once per day, you can empower a single ray spell, 
as though with the Empower Spell feat, with-
out any adjustment to the spell’s level 
or casting time . This effect applies 
equally to spells that are 
already rays and those 
you warp into 
rays    .
PlaYI  ng a sP ellWar  P snIP er
You  value  precision  and  control .  Not  comfortable  with 
the flashy and clumsy style of most destructive spells, you 
have learned to focus them into tight, manageable beams . 
This desire for exacting detail colors every aspect of your 
life, from your dealings with others to your personal work 
ethic . You do not speak in generalizations, preferring spe-
cific facts . Until experience teaches you better, you take 
information, people, and events at face value .
Combat
You excel at fighting isolated creatures, focusing your 
attention and your precise spellcasting on one target at 
a time . When faced with a group of foes, though, you 
are less effective . Although you can cast area spells, they 
lack  your  specialized  destructive  power  when  not  in 
ray form . For this reason you should focus on a single 
foe in an opposing group, preferably one that seems not 
particularly agile .
advancement
You likely learned your trade from a mentor, also a spell-
warp sniper, whose attention was drawn by your discipline 
and focus . You were encouraged by your mentor to join 
an organization that befits your morals and beliefs . Some 
guilds and other magical organizations 
recruit precise, dedicated individu-
als  who  show  promise,  whether 
they  run  in  street  gangs  or  walk 
the  grandest  halls  of  wizardry . 
The best candidate is someone 
already devoted to the study of 
magic who can then learn the 
ways  of  trickery  and  stealth; 
such individuals are easier to 
find than pocket-picking street 
urchins with the potential to 
wield magic .
 Once  you  become  a 
spellwarp  sniper,  you  must 
maintain your discipline and 
focus . Concentration and Spell-
craft  remain  vital  skills  for  you, 
and Hide, Move Silently, and Spot become increasingly 
important . Your feat selection should continue to support 
your  use  of  ray  spells:  Good  choices  include  Improved 
Precise Shot, and Split Ray and Ranged Spell Specializa-
tion (both from Complete Arcane) . Weapon Focus (ray) is an 
acceptable choice, though since rays require only ranged 
touch attacks to hit, the additional accuracy might not be 
necessary . Reach Spell (Complete Divine) might also be a 
good choice, depending on your available array of touch 
spells .
resources
Most spellwarp snipers belong to some kind of organi-
zation .  If  you  do  not  already,  you  are  likely  to  endure 
continual recruitment offers . When you are attached to 
an organization, you can expect to find support both from 
the leaders of the group and from those with whom you 
actively  serve .  Such  support  includes  training  and  any 
needed supplies for your studies . Snipers are invaluable 
to a team, and you make one of the best . In turn, you are 
expected to aid your colleagues within the organization, 
typically by joining teams that require fire support . 
Table 2–14: The Spellwarp Sniper Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Spellcasting
1st +0 +0 +0 +2 Spellwarp +1 level of existing spellcasting class
2nd +1 +0 +0 +3 Sudden raystrike +1d6 +1 level of existing spellcasting class
3rd +2 +1 +1 +3 Precise Shot +1 level of existing spellcasting class
4th +3 +1 +1 +4 Sudden raystrike +2d6 +1 level of existing spellcasting class
5th +3 +1 +1 +4 Ray mastery +1 level of existing spellcasting class
Class	Skills	(4	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Concentration, Craft, Hide, Intimidate, Knowledge (arcana), Move Silently, Profession, 
Spellcraft, Spot. 
Tessa Senchan,  
a spellwarp sniper
Illus. by E. Deschamps


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
sP ellWar  P snIP ers In   The World
“We figured we could take ’em. We got the jump on those guards in 
the square, but then the fire started shootin’ into us. Beams o’ fire 
like flaming yellow needles. I don’t know where they were coming 
from, and I didn’t wait around long enough to find out!”
—Stecky “the Clutch” Rockwater, 
Red Knives Gang
Since spellwarp snipers usually belong to organizations, 
you can readily introduce one into your campaign through 
a group affiliated with the PCs .
organization
A spellwarp sniper is particularly effective in the role of 
ranged support, having greater accuracy than others who 
rely on traditional weapons . Assassins’ guilds and thieves’ 
guilds openly welcome spellwarp snipers . City and royal 
guards also actively recruit them . In addition, organizations 
that focus on the study of magic recruit spellwarp snipers 
for their surgical precision . The ability to hone devastating 
evocations into pinpoint attacks greatly reduces the chance 
of accidental damage to the surroundings, especially in 
libraries and universities .
  Sometimes a spellwarp sniper occupies a different role, 
that of executioner . A spellwarped fireball ray to the back 
of the head is more deadly than a crossbow bolt and sends 
a more terrifying message .
nPC    reactions
Popular among allies, respected by rivals, and feared by 
enemies, spellwarp snipers elicit a wide range of reactions 
from those they meet . Those fighting on the same side as 
one are typically friendly, welcoming such a powerful ally . 
Spellwarp snipers acknowledge one another as belonging 
to an elite group of spellcasters, but they tread carefully 
among their own kind . Overall, they are indifferent toward 
one another . Those who have suffered at the hands of a 
spellwarp  sniper  offer  no  quarter  and  begin  as  openly 
hostile .
sP ellWar  P snIP er    lore
Characters with ranks in the appropriate Knowledge skill 
(arcana for arcane casters or religion for divine casters) can 
research spellwarp snipers to learn more about them . When 
a character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: A spellwarp sniper can hit a vital spot with a 
spell just as a rogue can with a crossbow bolt, and usually 
far more accurately .
 DC 15: Spellwarp snipers can manipulate area spells to 
make them into precise beams of destructive magic .
 DC 20: If you see someone who looks like a spellcaster 
watching you intently, take cover . She’s probably looking 
for just the right time to blast you with a ray .
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific spellwarp snipers 
in  your  campaign,  including  a  notable  individual,  the 
area in which she operates, and the kinds of activities she 
undertakes .
  A PC who wishes to enter this prestige class usually seeks 
out a mentor . The easiest method is to contact an organiza-
tion with which the character is friendly: a thieves’ guild, 
the city or royal guard, a temple, or a wizard’s university, 
depending on the PC’s affiliations . 
sP ellWar  P snIP ers In   The gaMe
Spellwarp snipers can bring great power to bear in a small 
space . At lower levels they serve as magical assassins or 
sharpshooters, particularly as part of an ambush or group 
raid   . Higher-level spellwarp snipers make effective leaders, 
particularly if they command a number of other spellwarp 
snipers . At any level, they are interesting and surprising 
spellcasting opponents .
  The prestige class appeals to evokers for obvious reasons . 
Players who like the role of long-ranged support combat-
ant or who prefer characters with precision-based attacks 
should enjoy the change of pace offered by the spellwarp 
sniper . 
adaptation
As a prestige class, the spellwarp sniper is already fairly 
generic in the way it interacts with a campaign setting . It 
doesn’t require new rules or different sources of power . For 
an interesting take on spellwarp snipers, try changing the 
types of spells they can warp . Perhaps they can transform 
touch spells rather than area spells, or they focus their abili-
ties only on nondamaging area spells . Depending on the 
needs of your campaign, you might change the class’s role 
in a group, or create a separate organization of spellwarp 
snipers that is not affiliated with another group .
sample encounter
A spellwarp sniper might appear wherever the PCs could 
encounter an assassin or a mundane sniper . Characters 
might stumble onto one intently watching a distant battle, 
occasionally casting an unfamiliar ray spell into the fray . 
They might also come across one in close quarters, finishing 
or preparing for an assassination .
 EL 12: Tessa Senchan works for the royal guard, support-
ing the front-line combatants . While her comrades cross 
swords with the city’s worst, she stays hidden at a distance, 
blasting thugs and murderers with her pinpoint-accurate 
spells . The PCs might meet Tessa if they accept employment 
with the guard and work with her on an operation . If they 
walk on the other side of the law, the PCs might become 
targets of Tessa’s deadly beams . If they stumble across her 
position, or trace her spells back to her, they must deal with 
several lower-level guards protecting her . 
  A party that is uninvolved in the law of the city (whether 
upholding it or breaking it) might cross paths with Tessa 
while she’s on her way to her next assignment, incurring 
neither a friendly nor a hostile response .


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
Tessa Senchan CR 12
Female half-elf rogue 1/wizard 6/spellwarp sniper 5
LN Medium humanoid (elf )
Init +2; Senses low-light vision; Listen +8, Spot +12 (+15 in 
shadow)
Languages	Common, Celestial, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, 
Halfling, Infernal, Undercommon, empathic link 
AC 15, touch 13, flat-footed 13
 (+2 Dex, +1 deflection, +2 natural)
hp 50 (12 HD)
Immune sleep
Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +10
Speed 30 ft. (6 squares)
Melee	mwk quarterstaff +6/+1 (1d6–1)
Ranged	ray spells +9 touch
Base	Atk	+6; Grp	+5
Atk	Options Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Enlarge Spell, 
Empower Spell, sneak attack +1d6, spellwarp (maximum 
5th), sudden raystrike +2d6
Special	Actions ray mastery
Combat	Gear 3 potions of cure light wounds
Wizard	Spells	Prepared (CL 11th; 1d20+13 to overcome SR):
 6th—disintegrate (DC 22), repulsion (DC 22)
5th—baleful polymorph (DC 21), cone of cold (DC 22), 
empowered fireball (DC 20)
4th—dimension door, empowered scorching ray, ice storm 
(2) (DC 21)
3rd—dispel magic, fly, fireball (2) (DC 20), ray of exhaustion 
2nd—enlarged ray of enfeeblement, invisibility, scorching 
ray (3), web (DC 18)
1st—mage armor (2), protection from evil, magic missile, 
ray of enfeeblement, shield
 0—mage hand, prestidigitation, ray of frost (2)
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 22, Wis 12, Cha 10
SQ familiar, share spells, trapfinding
Feats Alertness
B
 (if familiar within 5 ft.), Point Blank Shot, 
Precise Shot
B
, Enlarge Spell
B
, Empower Spell, Scribe 
Scroll
B
, Spell Focus (evocation), Spell Penetration, 
Weapon Focus (ray)
Skills Concentration +16, Decipher Script +16, Diplomacy +2, 
Gather Information +6, Hide +12, Knowledge (arcana) +21, 
Knowledge (local) +16, Knowledge (nobility and royalty) 
+7, Knowledge (religion) +20, Knowledge (the planes) 
+7, Listen +8, Search +7, Spellcraft +21, Spot +12 (+15 in 
shadow) 
Possessions	combat gear plus masterwork quarterstaff, 
amulet of natural armor +2, ring of protection +1, brooch of 
shielding, headband of intellect +4, spellbook
Spellbook	spells prepared plus 0—all; 1st—protection from 
chaos, true strike; 2nd—glitterdust; 4th—bestow curse, 
remove curse; 5th—wall of force, wall of stone
Holand, Owl Familiar CR —
NE Tiny magical beast (augmented animal)
Init +3; Senses low-light vision; Listen +14, Spot +6 (+14 in 
shadows)
Languages empathic link, speak with master
AC 20, touch 15, flat-footed 17
 (+2 size, +3 Dex, +5 natural)
hp 25 (6 HD)
Resist improved evasion
Fort +3, Ref +8, Will +11
Speed 10 ft. (2 squares), fly 40 ft. (average)
Melee	talons +11 (1d4–3)
Space 2-1/2 ft.; Reach 0 ft.
Base	Atk	+6; Grp	–5
Atk	Options deliver touch spells
Abilities	Str 4, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 8, Wis 14, Cha 4
Feats Weapon Finesse
Skills Concentration +15, Hide +21, Listen +14, Move Silently 
+17, Search +0, Spot +6 (+14 in shadows)
unCannY TrIC ks  Ter
“If you liked that, just wait’ll you see what’s next!”
—Ameslan Trag, uncanny trickster
The uncanny trickster combines the features of his primary 
class  with  a  wider  range  of  skill  tricks  than  any  other 
character can achieve . 
beCoMI  ng an  
unCannY TrIC ks  Ter
Because of the simple requirements for entry, the uncanny 
trickster appeals to a wide range of characters . Rogues, 
bards, rangers, and other skill-focused characters are the 
most likely to enter the prestige class, but the entry require-
ments are well within the reach of intelligent members 
of any class . Pure spellcasters prefer the magical trickster 
prestige  class  (page  45),  while  warriors  find  the  battle 
trickster (page 28) more to their liking .
Entry Requirements
Skills: Any four skills 8 ranks each. 
Skill	Tricks: Any four. 
Class fea Tures
The uncanny trickster excels at using skill tricks . He can 
use more tricks than any other character .
 Class  Features: At each level after 1st, you gain class 
features (including spellcasting ability) and an increase in 
effective level as if you had also gained a level in a class to 
which you belonged before adding the prestige class level . 
You do not, however, gain the benefit of your previous 
class’s Hit Dice, attack progression, skill points, or saving 
throws . If you had more than one class before becoming an 
uncanny trickster, you must decide to which class to add 
each level for the purpose of determining class features .
 Bonus Trick (Ex): At each level, you gain a bonus skill 
trick for which you meet the prerequisite . These bonus 
tricks do not cost skill points and do not count against 
your maximum number of skill tricks available .
 Favorite  Trick  (Ex): You have a limited repertoire of 
signature stunts . At each level, choose one skill trick you 
know that you can perform only once per encounter . You 
can now use that trick one additional time per encounter . 
You can’t choose the same skill trick more than once .
 Tricky Defense (Ex): At 3rd level, you have mastered 
incorporating tricks into your personal defenses . In any 
round when you perform a skill trick, you gain a +1 com-
petence bonus on saving throws until the start of your 
next turn.


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
PlaYI  ng an unCannY TrIC ks  Ter
You know more tricks than anyone else, and you can use 
your tricks more frequently . Many scoundrels use tricks 
to augment their other abilities, but you take the opposite 
outlook: You rely on your tricks and use your other abilities 
in support of them . 
  You work well with others, especially those who can 
perform skill tricks or have abilities that emulate tricks . 
Becoming a trick expert instantly affiliates you with a very 
loose fellowship of tricksters (battle, magical, and uncanny) . 
You don’t get along with every trickster you meet, though: 
Some jealously guard their secrets and view others of their 
kind as rivals .
Combat
“Full of surprises” best describes your fighting style . You 
enter combat cautiously, setting the tone of your contribu-
tion   . While the fighters slug it out and the casters stay in 
the back slinging spells, you move around unpredictably, 
always  looking  for  an  opportunity  to  deliver  a  sudden 
finishing blow . 
  If you prefer fighting from range, use movement tricks to 
get yourself somewhere safe on the battlefield, as far from 
the main engagement as possible . From this more secure 
vantage point, you can use your ranged attacks (including 
appropriate skill tricks) to support your allies .
advancement
Becoming an uncanny trickster requires hard work and 
sacrifice . While others devote their training to learning 
only skills, you seek a balance between skills and tricks . 
You need to invest in skills, since you need a minimum 
level of competence in a skill before attempting new and 
spectacular applications of it, but you devote as many skill 
points as you can to tricks . Thus, you know many skills but 
have mastered few (if any) .
  Interaction and mental tricks can be very useful in com-
bat, but you should focus on movement tricks to get yourself 
safely around the battlefield . The prestige class offers both 
plentiful skill points and more bonus skill tricks than any 
other, so buy as many tricks as you can afford . Maximize 
your potential by picking up feats that grant bonus skill 
tricks as well (see Chapter 3) .
resources
Although you might not have realized it when you became 
an uncanny trickster, you are part of a larger (albeit very 
loosely organized) group . The benefits and requirements 
of this group are few, but it does offer the camaraderie of 
shared experiences as well as the chance to learn new tricks . 
Nevertheless, tricksters owe no more to one another than 
do any other people with similar, nonbinding interests . 
Table 2–15: The Uncanny Trickster Hit Die: d6
	Base
	Attack	    Fort	    Ref	    Will	    	
Level	    Bonus	   Save	  Save	  Save	   Special	Class	Features
1st +0 +0 +2 +0 Bonus trick, favorite trick —
2nd +1 +0 +3 +0 Bonus trick, favorite trick +1 level of existing class features
3rd +2 +1 +3 +1 Bonus trick, favorite trick, tricky defense +1 level of existing class features
Class	Skills	(8	+	Int	modifier	per	level): Appraise, Balance, Bluff, Climb, Craft, Decipher Script, Diplomacy, Disable Device, 
Disguise, Escape Artist, Forgery, Gather Information, Hide, Intimidate, Jump, Listen, Move Silently, Open Lock, Perform, 
Profession, Search, Sense Motive, Sleight of Hand, Spot, Swim, Tumble, Use Magic Device, Use Rope.
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
The ClerIC and The Con
Ambersmill,	714	CY
The setting sun cast a hellish glow over the abandoned hamlet 
of Ambersmill, its red light turning fields of tobacco and devil-
weed to seas of blood.
    Or  at  least,  that’s  how  it  seemed  to  the  shaky  acolyte  of 
Pelor. 
 In  reality,  the  dusk  warmly  illuminated  a  peaceful,  ordinary-
looking farm village. The chill breeze of the coming night blew 
through still-open windows, the whistle of its passage the only 
noise. 
 “So  where  are  the  devils?”  Essan  whispered,  the  novice  barely 
able to keep the tremble from his voice. “The refugees said the town 
was crawling with them! Why did they send us to scout if—”
    “Shhh! How am I supposed to bloody know?” came Sheis’s 
hiss. “Just keep your voice down.”
    Even  though  the  woman  was  supposedly  a  veteran  scout, 
Essan could see her knuckles stark white against the dark hilt 
of her long, black-bladed knife. Hunched behind her as the pair 
hid in a shadowy alley at the village’s edge, the nervous cleric 
scrutinized  her  heavy  leather  pack,  her  new-looking  belt,  and 
her barely scuffed boots. Sheis had been hired by the church to 
investigate reports of demons, and every inch of her looked the 
woodwise hunter—too much so. 
    “You’re not really a ranger, are you?” Essan blurted the words 
before he could even think to bite them back.
 Sheis spun around, momentarily wide-eyed, then her look quickly 
lightened. “Do you know how much the church pays for these little 
forays? Why should some forest-skipper get that much coin?” She 
turned back to look out over the town, her beaded red hair jingling 
as she nodded toward a manor overlooking the hamlet.
    “Up there. I think I see something,” she whispered, standing. 
“It’s too late to back out on this now.”
    Essan took a long gulp and whimpered as he rose to follow. 
“Pelor preserve us.”


Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
unCannY 
Tr  IC ks  Ters  
In   The 
World
“I’ve  seen  his  kind 
before.  Just  when 
you  think  you’ve 
seen  everything  he 
has to offer, he surprises 
you.”
—Guled Conu, retired adventurer
Depending  on  their  moral  fiber,  uncanny 
tricksters  can  be  anything  from  tumbling 
entertainers to second-story burglars . Adventur-
ing characters simply continue their previous careers but 
use their many tricks to improve their own and 
their allies’ chances of survival . 
organization
Uncanny tricksters congregate with magi-
cal tricksters and battle tricksters when 
possible . Having come to the prestige class 
from different backgrounds, they have less in common with 
one another than they do with other tricksters . They swap 
techniques, introduce newly developed tricks and trick-
supporting equipment and magic, and share experiences . 
Outside observers might assume such a meeting is part of a 
circus or carnival, with tricksters springing about perform-
ing for the enjoyment and education of onlookers .
   These gatherings, though 
enjoyable, do not represent 
a structured organization . 
Uncanny tricksters looking 
to become part of something 
more permanent usually join 
groups that appreciate both 
their abilities and their mor-
al  choices:  thieves’  guilds, 
carnivals,  monasteries,  ninja 
clans, adventuring groups, and 
so on . Within an organization, an 
uncanny  trickster  performs 
the  role  of  his  former 
adventuring class, en-
hanced with unusual 
techniques .
nPC    reactions
Most people look on un-
canny tricksters with awe . A 
few  conceited  individuals  view 
them with contempt and try to be-
little their abilities, generally displaying 
indifferent  to  unfriendly  attitudes .  Ad-
venturers respect uncanny tricksters for their 
discipline and training, and are generally friendly toward 
them .
   Common folk do not understand the difference between 
uncanny tricksters and other trickster classes, so their atti-
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
uP In sMokes
Ambersmill,	714	CY
Bloody clerics! Sheis waved her hand rapidly, motioning for the 
overweight Pelorian to join her where she crouched at the base 
of a statue near the abandoned town’s center. I should never have 
conned my way into this job.
 With a trundling charge, Essan crashed into the statue next to 
the supposed ranger. He huffed in a most unstealthy manner, 
an irregular wheeze that turned Sheis’s thoughts momentarily 
to suffocation. Refocusing her mind on the matter at hand, she 
pointed at the nearby manor house until the cleric composed 
himself enough to follow the line of her finger.
 “Up there. See that?” she whispered, still holding onto at least 
the illusion of stealth. “Smoke.”
    Indeed,  from  the  open  doors  of  the  many-pillared  manor 
trailed several long wisps of gray-white smoke. Not the billow-
ing  clouds  of  some  uncontrolled  blaze,  but  a  number  of  thin 
tendrils.
 Trying to keep to the shadows, the pair approached the manor 
and climbed its cracked marble steps. The whitewashed front 
doors  were  thrown  wide,  allowing  the  smoke  to  issue  forth. 
As Sheis neared, she caught a whiff of one of the lazily curling 
wisps, a scent that reminded her of every seedy dockside tavern 
or devilweed den she’d ever slummed in. Holding up a hand to 
stay the cleric behind her, Sheis slowly peered around the corner 
of the door frame.
    Within  lay  the  lavish  entry  hall  of  a  landed  noble’s  manor: 
a  gaudy,  self-indulgent  display  of  fine  stone,  polished  wood, 
rococo sculpture, and pretentious art. At its center smoldered 
a small fire surrounded by tobacco-leaf wrappings and empty 
humidors, giving off a column of intoxicating smoke that filled 
the  room  with  its  heady  scents.  Gawking  at  the  sight,  Sheis 
stumbled backward at the sound of the harsh, wheezing voice 
that boomed from the fire.
    “Foolish human! Know you not that I am feared among your 
kind? Bow down and cower! Hide your face from Abernathanorial, 
Doom of Dryads, Dearth of Light, Demon of Darkest Smoke!” 
 Essan nearly bolted, but Sheis quickly drew one of her smaller 
blades—her luckiest one—and threw it directly at the pillar of 
smoke.
    “Ooow!” came a shrill squeak, followed by a racking cough. 
Knitting her brow, Sheis marched right up to the smoking fire. 
She reached into the column of smoke and, to Essan’s amaze-
ment,  yanked  out  something  dark  and  writhing.  A  minuscule 
form only about 2 feet tall, the gray thing looked like a human 
caricature, with a beaklike nose and beady black eyes, seemingly 
made of living smoke. In one wispy hand it clutched a fine, long 
pipe.
    “Here’s  the  ‘demon  invasion’  those  superstitious  villagers 
were ranting about.” She is barely held back a chuckle as she 
shook the spluttering creature at the amazed cleric. “A mephit 
with a bad habit and a sharp tongue!”
Ameslan Trag, 
an uncanny trickster
Illus. by R. Gallegos

0
Cha  PT  er 2
Pres
TI  ge
 
Classes
tudes span the spectrum . However, because some tricksters 
use their abilities to take advantage of less talented folk, a 
victim of such exploitation has a negative view of all trick-
sters, magical or otherwise, and is unfriendly at best . 
unCannY TrIC ks  Ter    lore
Characters with ranks in Knowledge (local) can research 
uncanny  tricksters  to  learn  more  about  them .  When  a 
character succeeds on a skill check, the following lore is 
revealed, including the information from lower DCs .
 DC 10: Uncanny tricksters know more skill tricks than 
anyone else .
 DC 15: An uncanny trickster continues to practice his 
other abilities even as he masters tricks, so he’s capable of 
much more than just a few stunts .
 DC 20: Uncanny tricksters don’t have a formal organi-
zation, but they do occasionally gather with others who 
respect their talents .
 DC 30: Characters who achieve this level of success can 
learn important details about specific uncanny tricksters 
in  your  campaign,  including  a  notable  individual,  the 
area in which he operates, and the kinds of activities he 
undertakes .
  The easiest way to find an uncanny trickster is at a trick-
ster gathering . Because such events are rare, however, PCs 
seeking out an uncanny trickster should contact groups that 
are likely to seek out their talents, as described above . 
unCannY TrIC ks  Ters  
In   The gaMe
Uncanny  tricksters  make  interesting  opponents .  They 
have  such  a  wide  variety  of  abilities  available  to  them 
that no two are ever the same . Their abilities, particularly 
those that allow for escape and evasion, can make them 
particularly frustrating opponents and set them up well 
as recurring villains . 
  A player who likes to surprise the DM or other players or 
who wants to bring cinematic action into a campaign would 
probably enjoy playing an uncanny trickster . The prestige 
class offers opportunities to perform actions otherwise not 
covered in the rules . An uncanny trickster character can 
fill any number of roles in a party, depending on his other 
class or classes . 
adaptation
The uncanny trickster is already a very generalized prestige 
class that can easily fit into any campaign setting . It does 
rely on the new rules for skill tricks, however, so it is not 
suitable for a campaign that does not incorporate them . 
Replacing bonus tricks with extra feats that enhance move-
ment and defense can repurpose the character as a sneaky 
combatant with a more generalized approach to skills .
sample encounter
Unpredictable and talented, uncanny tricksters could show 
up anywhere, doing anything . PCs might encounter one 
at a trickster gathering, or in battle beside one or opposite 
one   . 
 EL 10: Ameslan Trag uses his many abilities to protect 
the weak and punish the wicked . He always has a trick 
up his sleeve and can readily get out of scrapes that would 
otherwise finish him . PCs might run into Ameslan in the 
middle of a seemingly desperate fight—he tends to get in 
over his head, then pulls out several tricks to suddenly win 
the day . Depending on the situation, the party might come 
to his aid or merely watch in amusement .
Ameslan Trag CR 10
Male gnome rogue 7/uncanny trickster 3
CG Small humanoid
Init +3; Senses low-light vision; Listen +5, Spot +13
Languages Common, Dwarven, Gnome, Orc
AC 19, touch 15, flat-footed 19; +4 AC against giants, 
improved uncanny dodge
 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +3 armor, +1 deflection, +1 natural)
hp 68 (10 HD) 
Resist evasion
Fort +7, Ref +12, Will +5; +2 on saves against illusions
Speed 20 ft. (4 squares)
Melee	mwk short sword +7/+2 (1d4–1/19–20)
Ranged +1 light crossbow +11 (1d6+1/19–20)
Base	Atk	+7; Grp	+2
Atk	Options Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, +1 on attacks 
against kobolds and goblinoids, sneak attack +5d6
Special	Actions favorite trick (Slipping Past, Spot the Weak 
Point, Twisted Charge), skill tricks 
Combat	Gear panic button (strengthening)*
 *New magic item described in Chapter 5
	Spell-Like	Abilities (CL 1st):
1/day—dancing lights, ghost sound (DC 10), prestidigita-
tion, speak with animals (burrowing mammal only, 
duration 1 minute)
Abilities	Str 8, Dex 16, Con 16, Int 14, Wis 12, Cha 9
SQ trap sense +3, trapfinding, tricky defense
Feats Freerunner*, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Weapon 
Finesse
 *New feat described in Chapter 3
Skills Balance +18, Bluff +12, Climb +12, Craft (alchemy) 
+3, Diplomacy +1, Disguise –1 (+1 acting), Escape Artist 
+16, Hide +20, Intimidate +1, Jump +14, Listen +5, Move 
Silently +17, Sleight of Hand +18, Spot +13, Swim +4, 
Tumble +18, Use Rope +3 (+5 involving bindings)
Skill	Tricks* Acrobatic Backstab, Back on Your Feet, Corner 
Perch, Escape Attack, Leaping Climber, Mosquito’s Bite, 
Quick Swim, Slipping Past, Spot the Weak Point, Twisted 
Charge, Wall Walker
 *Described in Chapter 3
Possessions	combat gear plus +1 leather armor, master-
work short sword, +1 light crossbow with 40 bolts and 
10   adamantine bolts, amulet of natural armor +1, ring of 
protection +1, cloak of resistance +1, ring of feather falling, 
thieves’ tools

hile some scoundrels use spells or psionic 
powers to overcome challenges, the average 
scoundrel relies on more mundane methods to 
succeed . The right feat can make the difference 
between success and failure, and this chapter 
presents a wide range of new feat options for scoundrels 
looking for new tricks .
  Speaking of tricks—this chapter also provides a new 
avenue for characters to use their skill points to gain an 
edge    . The skill trick subsystem opens up a broad variety 
of exciting stunts and useful knacks that lets any char-
acter display the panache and style of the quintessential 
scoundrel .
neW fea Ts
Feats define a scoundrel’s abilities in the taverns, back alleys, 
and other places where he must work his trade, and they can 
keep him alive when the job turns against him and he has to 
fight to survive . The feats in this section build on the talents 
of those classes that most typically become scoundrels, as 
well as on skill tricks . They include ambush feats for rogues 
and ninjas and some new bardic music feats .
  This section also introduces luck feats, a new category 
of options that allow a character to call on the power of 
good fortune to aid his endeavors .
aMbush fea Ts 
Ambush feats allow you to use your sneak attack abil-
ity to inflict an additional harmful or hindering effect 
upon an opponent, at the cost of one or more of the 
extra damage dice you normally deal with a successful 
hit   . You must declare your intent to use an ambush 
feat before making your attack roll, and your sneak 
attack must deal at least one extra die of damage (that 
is, you can’t reduce the number of extra damage dice 
to zero) . You can apply multiple ambush feats to the 
same attack as long as you still deal at least one extra 
die of damage with the attack .
  The sudden strike class feature of a ninja (Complete 
Adventurer) is the equivalent of sneak attack for the 
purpose of qualifying for ambush feats .
  Creatures immune to extra damage from sneak 
attacks are also immune to the secondary effects 
created by ambush feats . Even if a creature is 
vulnerable to sneak attacks, if your attack deals 
no damage to the creature (for example, if it is 
negated by the creature’s damage reduction), the 
secondary effect doesn’t occur .
  Although the skirmish class feature of a scout 
(Complete Adventurer) doesn’t count as sneak attack 
for the purpose of qualifying for feats, a scout with 
the Swift Ambusher feat (page 81) can combine 
1
Illus. by D. Bircham

2