Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
sneak attack and skirmish extra damage for the purpose 
of qualifying for ambush feats . Even with this feat, a scout 
can’t sacrifice skirmish bonus damage to gain the benefit 
of an ambush feat .
  Two feats that should retroactively be considered ambush 
feats appeared in the Complete Warrior supplement: Arterial 
Strike and Hamstring . The feats require no change, except 
to note the requirements given above .
bardIC MusIC fea Ts
Bardic music feats, as the name suggests, require the bardic 
music ability, and they cost daily uses of the bardic music 
ability to activate . All bardic music feats require that the 
character be able to produce music to use the feat, even 
those that require only a free action and those that require 
no action at all .
  Despite the names of the various bardic music feats, they 
work equally well with any variety of the Perform skill .
  Class features that resemble bardic music, such as the 
war chanter’s chanter music (Complete Warrior) or a seeker 
of the song’s seeker music abilities (Complete Arcane), can 
be substituted for the bardic music prerequisite of this 
feat, and uses of those class features can be spent in place 
of bardic music uses to gain the benefit of the feat .
  In general, bardic music feats do not function in an area 
of magical silence .
luCk f  ea Ts
Most scoundrels think themselves to be clever, surviv-
ing by their wits and escaping capture or injury with 
their masterful skills and abilities . Often, though, 
scoundrels survive simply out of dumb luck . 
The luck feats presented here put the power 
of luck (good and 
bad) into the hands 
of characters . 
  Luck feats don’t directly improve your abilities or add 
new features to your repertoire . By selecting a luck feat, 
you gain access to a specific lucky effect (usually a reroll) 
that helps keep you alive or ensures that you succeed . Each 
additional luck feat grants you another specific lucky effect 
that can help you win even when the dice say you should 
lose, in addition to another daily luck reroll .
  Though you as a player decide when to use a luck feat, in the 
game world a lucky result almost never occurs consciously . 
Instead, a luck reroll represents a fortuitous event, such 
as a fire giant inexplicably losing his grip on his weapon, 
a puddle on the floor causing you to slip and be missed by 
an arrow, or a bit of rust on a lock preventing it from fully 
closing—making it easier to pick than normal .
The Mechanics of luck
When you select a luck feat, you gain access to a luck reroll 
similar to the power granted by the Luck domain . Unlike 
with that granted power, each luck feat specifies what 
kind of roll can be rerolled . For example, Magical Fortune 
allows you to reroll the damage from a single arcane spell 
you have just cast .
  Typically, a luck feat grants one luck reroll per day, but 
luck rerolls can be used for any luck feat you have . For 
example, if you have Magical Fortune and Lucky Start, you 
gain two luck rerolls per day . You can use each of them 
either to reroll damage from an arcane spell or to reroll 
an initiative check .
   Expending a luck reroll to use a luck feat is either 
a swift or immediate 
action,  as  noted  in 
the feat descrip-
tion   . Even if 
you  some-
how  have 
the  ability 
A little bit of luck goes a long way
Illus. by W. Mahy


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
to take more than one swift action or immediate action 
per round, you can’t expend luck rerolls more than once 
to affect the same event .
  Unless otherwise noted, you must decide whether to 
make a luck reroll after you have made the original roll, 
but before the success or failure of that roll has been 
announced . You must take the result of the reroll, even if 
it’s worse than the original result .
  Some luck feats allow you to expend luck rerolls to 
change fate in ways other than simply rerolling dice .
fea T des  CrIPTIons
The new feats in this chapter are described below in 
alphabetical order . For a summary of prerequisites and 
benefits, see Table 3–1 on pages 74 and 75 . 
advanTageous avo  IdanCe 
[luCk] 
You have a knack for ducking at just the right 
moment .
 Prerequisite: Character level 3rd, any luck 
feat   .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as 
an immediate action to force a foe to reroll 
a critical hit confirmation roll made when 
attacking you . 
  You can expend two luck rerolls as an 
immediate action to force a foe to reroll an 
attack roll made against you .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
 Special: Unlike other luck feats, you can use 
this feat after seeing the success of the roll to 
be affected .
asCeTIC sTalker
You have practiced a secret technique that combines 
your considerable talents in unarmed combat with 
a greater understanding of your inner ki . 
 Prerequisite: Ki power, ki strike (magic) .
 Benefit: Your monk and ninja levels stack for 
the purpose of determining the size of your ki 
pool    . For example, a 4th-level monk/2nd-level 
ninja with this feat could use her ki powers 
a number of times equal to 3 (half the sum 
of her monk and ninja levels) + her Wis-
dom bonus (if any) .
  Your monk and ninja levels also stack for the purpose 
of determining your unarmed strike damage, as well 
as your ki strike class feature . For example, a 4th-level 
monk/6th-level ninja would deal 1d10 points of damage 
with her unarmed strike, and her unarmed strike would 
overcome damage reduction as a lawful magic weapon (as 
if she were a 10th-level monk) .
  In addition, you can multiclass freely between the monk 
and ninja classes . You must still remain lawful in order to 
continue advancing as a monk . You still face the normal 
XP  penalties  for  hav-
ing multiple classes 
more  than  one 
level apart .
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
luCk   fea Ts and The luCks  Tealer
The  luckstealer  prestige  class  (Races  of  the  Wild)  provides 
another method of maximizing your own luck while simultane-
ously minimizing the luck of your opponent. The luckstealer 
has a pool of luck points stolen from other characters, which 
he uses for various purposes. In addition to the options de-
scribed in the prestige class, a luckstealer with one or more luck 
feats can spend 3 points from his luck pool as though making 
a luck reroll, following all the normal rules for luck feats and 
luck rerolls.
A practitioner  
of the Ascetic Stalker style 
knows many secrets
Illus. by W. Mahy


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
 Special: A monk can select Ascetic Stalker as a bonus 
feat at 1st, 2nd, or 6th level instead of one of the other feats 
indicated for those levels (PH 41)   . 
beTT  er luCkY T  han good [luCk]
You can succeed where others would surely fail . 
 Prerequisite: Character level 6th, any two luck feats .
 Benefit: If you roll a natural 1 when making an attack 
roll, you can expend one luck reroll as a swift action to 
instead treat the roll as a natural 20 . 
  You can use this feat once per day .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
ChanT of The long road  
[b ardIC MusIC ]
You can channel the power of your bardic music to encour-
age your allies to pick up the pace on a long walk .
 Prerequisite: Bardic music, Perform 6 ranks .
 Benefit: As a standard action, you can expend one daily 
use of your bardic music ability to allow yourself and all 
Table 3–1: New Feats
General	Feats	Prerequisites	Benefit
Ascetic Stalker
1
 Ki power, ki strike (magic)  Monk and ninja levels stack for unarmed strike damage and ki pool
Cool Head Any two mental skill tricks Learn two mental skill tricks and increase skill trick limit by one
Daredevil Athlete — Gain +5 competence bonus on physical skill check 3/day
Daring Outlaw Grace +1, sneak attack +2d6  Rogue and swashbuckler levels stack for grace, dodge bonus, 
and sneak attack
Daring Warrior
2
 Grace +1, Weapon Specialization Fighter and swashbuckler levels stack for grace, dodge bonus, 
  and feats
Deadly Defense
2
 — +1d6 damage with light weapons when fighting defensively
Expanded Ki Pool Ki power Gain three extra uses of your ki power
Enduring Ki Ki power Spend extra use of ki to add 1 round to duration
Freerunner Any two movement skill tricks Learn two movement skill tricks, increase skill trick limit by one
Improved Familiar Ability to acquire a new familiar,  Gain better familiar
 compatible alignment, sufficiently 
 high arcane spellcaster level 
Improved Skirmish
3
 Skirmish +2d6/+1 AC Move 20 feet to gain +2d6 points of damage, +2 AC
Martial Stalker
2
 Proficiency with all martial  Fighter and ninja levels stack for ki pool, AC bonus, and feats
 weapons, ki power 
Master Spellthief Ability to cast 2nd-level arcane  Spellthief and arcane spellcaster levels stack for steal spell and 
 spells, steal spell  arcane caster level; cast arcane spells in light armor
Poison Expert Poison use,   Your poisons’ save DC is 1 higher
 Craft (poisonmaking) 8 ranks
     Poison Master Poison use, Craft (poisonmaking)  Your poisons deal +1 damage/die
 8 ranks, Poison Expert 
Psithief Manifester level 1st, steal spell Steal power points instead of spells; gain new class skills
Savvy Rogue Rogue level 10th Your rogue special abilities improve
Sure Hand Any two manipulation skill tricks     Learn two manipulation skill tricks and increase skill trick limit 
by one
Sweet Talker Any two interaction skill tricks Learn two interaction skill tricks, increase skill trick limit by one
Swift Ambusher
3
 Skirmish +1d6/+1 AC,  Rogue and scout levels stack for skirmish bonuses
 sneak attack +1d6 
Swift Hunter
3
 Favored enemy,  Ranger and scout levels stack for skirmish bonuses, 
 skirmish +1d6/+1 AC favored enemies
Ambush	Feats	Prerequisites	Benefit
Concussion Attack Sneak attack +3d6 Trade 2d6 sneak attack damage to apply –2 penalty to 
  opponent’s Int checks and Wis checks
Deafening Strike Sneak attack +4d6 Trade 3d6 sneak attack damage to deafen target for 3 rounds
Disemboweling Strike Sneak attack +5d6,  Trade 4d6 sneak attack damage to deal 1d4 Con damage
 Weapon Focus (any slashing) 
Eldritch Erosion Sneak attack +4d6,  Trade 3d6 sneak attack damage to reduce SR/PR by 5
 Knowledge (arcana) 1 rank 
Head Shot Sneak attack +6d6,  Trade 5d6 sneak attack damage to confuse target for 1 round
 Weapon Focus (any bludgeoning) 
Impeding Attack Sneak attack +4d6 Trade 3d6 sneak attack damage to apply –2 penalty to 
  opponent’s Str checks and Dex checks
Merciful Strike Sneak attack +2d6 Trade 1d6 sneak attack damage to deal nonlethal damage
Mind Drain Power point reserve,  Trade 1d6 sneak attack damage to drain power points
 sneak attack +2d6 
Persistent Attacker Sneak attack +5d6 Trade 4d6 sneak attack damage to allow sneak attack 
  in next round
Throat Punch Improved Unarmed Strike,  Trade 2d6 sneak attack damage to hinder target’s speech
 sneak attack +3d6 for 3 rounds


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
allies within 60 feet to avoid taking nonlethal damage for 
hustling (PH 164)    . This requires 1 minute of performance, 
and the effect lasts for 1 hour .
Chord of dIsTra  CTIon  
[b ardIC MusIC ]
You can channel the power of your bardic music to make 
a sudden sound or gesture that momentarily distracts 
an opponent .
 Prerequisite: Bardic music, Perform 9 ranks .
 Benefit: As an immediate action, you can expend 
three daily uses of your bardic music ability to distract 
an opponent . The target must be within 30 feet of you 
and able to hear or see you . Make a Perform check, opposed 
by the target’s Sense Motive check (modified as if you 
were using Bluff to feint in combat) . If you succeed, 
that opponent is rendered flat-footed against an ally of 
your choice .
  The effect lasts until that opponent is attacked or until 
the start of your next turn, whichever comes first .
ConCussIon aTTaCk [aMbush]
Your attacks can damage your opponent’s ability to think 
clearly .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +3d6 .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack imposes a –2 
penalty on the target’s Intelligence and Wisdom checks, 
as well as on any Intelligence- and Wisdom-based skill 
checks, for 10 rounds . If you use this feat a second time 
on a target before 10 rounds have elapsed, the effect of the 
first use expires .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
2d6   .
Cool head
Your mental acuity serves you better than most .
 Prerequisite: Any two mental skill tricks .
 Benefit: You immediately learn up to two mental 
skill tricks at no cost, and your limit on skill tricks 
known increases by one . See page 82 for details on mental 
skill tricks .
Bardic	Music	Feats	Prerequisites	Benefit
Chant of the Long Road    Bardic music, Perform 6 ranks Bardic music allows allies to move overland more quickly
Chord of Distraction Bardic music, Perform 9 ranks Bardic music renders target flat-footed against one ally
Epic of the Lost King Bardic music, Perform 6 ranks Bardic music removes fatigue and exhaustion
Sound of Silence Bardic music, Perform 9 ranks Bardic music deafens a target
Warning Shout Bardic music, Perform 9 ranks,  Bardic music grants evasion, +5 morale bonus on next
 evasion Reflex save
Luck	Feats	Prerequisites	Benefit
Advantageous Avoidance  Character level 3rd, any luck feat Expend luck reroll to force foe to reroll critical threat 
  confirmation, or three luck rerolls to force foe to reroll attack
Better Lucky than Good Character level 6th,  Expend luck reroll to treat natural 1 on attack as
 any two luck feats  natural 20 instead
Dumb Luck Character level 6th,  Expend luck reroll to treat natural 1 on save as natural 20 instead
 any two luck feats 
Fortuitous Strike Character level 6th, any luck feat Expend luck reroll to reroll attack, or two luck rerolls to 
  reroll damage
Good Karma Character level 3rd Expend luck reroll to redirect attack against ally to you
Healer’s Luck — Reroll amount cured by healing spell
Lucky Break — Reroll Strength check to break item or burst door
Lucky Catch — Reroll Balance, Climb, or Jump check
Lucky Fingers — Reroll Disable Device, Open Lock, or Sleight of Hand check
Lucky Start — Reroll initiative check
Magical Fortune Caster level 3rd, any luck feat Expend luck reroll to reroll damage dealt by spell, or two luck 
  rerolls to reroll caster level check
Make Your Own Luck Character level 6th, any luck feat Reroll a skill check
Miser’s Fortune — Your items get +5 bonus on saves; expend luck reroll to force foe
  to reroll a sunder attack or Str check to damage nearby object
Psychic Luck Manifester level 3rd, any luck feat Expend luck reroll to reroll damage dealt by power, or two luck 
  rerolls to reroll manifester level check
Sly Fortune — Reroll Hide, Move Silently, or Tumble check
Survivor’s Luck Character level 9th, any luck feat Reroll a saving throw
Tempting Fate Character level 6th, any luck feat Reroll stabilization check, expend luck reroll to avoid being killed
Third Time’s the Charm Character level 3rd, any luck feat,  Reroll again with Luck domain granted power
 Luck domain 
Unbelievable Luck Any luck feat Gain two luck rerolls and +2 luck bonus on worst save
Victor’s Luck — Reroll critical threat confirmation
1 A fighter can select this feat as one of his fighter bonus feats (PH 38).
2 A monk can select this feat as one of her monk bonus feats (PH 41).
3 A scout can select this feat as one of her scout bonus feats (Complete Adventurer 13).


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
 Normal:  You  are 
limited  to  a  maxi-
mum  number  of 
skill tricks equal to 
one-half your char-
acter level .
daredevIl 
aT  hleTe
You are capable of pull-
ing off amazing stunts .
 Benefit: Three times 
per day, you can use an 
immediate  action  to 
gain a +5 competence 
bonus on a single Bal-
ance, Climb, Escape 
Artist, Jump, Ride, 
Swim,  or  Tumble 
check .
darIng ouTla W
You combine grace and stealth to deadly effect .
 Prerequisite: Grace +1, sneak attack +2d6 .
 Benefit: Your rogue and swashbuckler levels stack for the 
purpose of determining your competence bonus on Reflex 
saves from the grace class feature and the swashbuckler’s 
dodge bonus to AC . For example, a 7th-level rogue/4th-level 
swashbuckler has grace +2 and gains a +2 dodge bonus to 
AC, as if she were an 11th-level swashbuckler .
  Your rogue and swashbuckler levels also stack for the 
purpose of determining your sneak attack bonus damage . 
For example, a 7th-level rogue/4th-level swashbuckler 
would deal an extra 6d6 points of damage with her sneak 
attack, as if she were an 11th-level rogue . 
darIng WarrIor
You combine agility and extraordinary combat prowess 
to great effect .
 Prerequisite: Weapon Specialization, grace +1 .
 Benefit: Your fighter and swashbuckler levels stack 
for the purpose of determining your competence bonus 
on Reflex saves from the grace class feature and the 
swashbuckler’s dodge bonus to AC . For example, a 6th-
level fighter/5th-level swashbuckler has grace +2 and 
gains a +2 dodge bonus to AC, as if she were an 11th-level 
swashbuckler .
  Your fighter and swashbuckler levels also stack for the 
purpose of qualifying for feats that require a minimum 
fighter level, such as Greater Weapon Focus .
 Special: A fighter can select Daring Warrior as one of 
his fighter bonus feats (PH 38) .
deadlY defense
You are at your most dangerous when forced to protect 
yourself .
 Benefit: When fighting defensively, you deal an extra 
1d6 points of damage with any light weapon or with any 
weapon to which the Weapon Finesse feat applies (such 
as a rapier, spiked chain, or whip) .
  This feat’s benefit applies only when you are unarmored 
or wearing light armor and not using a shield .
 Special: If you have the Combat Expertise feat, you also 
gain the benefit of Deadly Defense when taking a penalty 
of at least –2 on your attack roll from that feat .
  A fighter can select Deadly Defense as one of his fighter 
bonus feats (PH 38) .
deafenIng sTrIke [aMbush]
Your stealthy attack leaves your foe’s head ringing .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +4d6 .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack causes the target 
to be deafened for 3 rounds . If you use this feat a second 
time on a target before 3 rounds have elapsed, the effect 
of the first use expires .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
3d6   .
dI  se Mbo  Wel  Ing sTrIke [aMbush]
You can slash open your opponent to devastating effect .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +5d6, Weapon Focus (any 
slashing weapon) .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack with a slashing 
weapon for which you have selected Weapon Focus deals 
1d4 points of Constitution damage in addition to its 
normal damage .
  You can’t use this feat against the same target more than 
once per day .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
4d6   .
Deadly Defense makes defensive fighting more dangerous for enemies
Illus. by C. Frank


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
duMb l  uCk [luCk]
You can survive situations that should kill you .
 Prerequisite: Character level 6th, any two luck feats .
 Benefit: If you roll a natural 1 when making a saving 
throw, you can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to instead treat the roll as a natural 20 . 
  You can use this feat once per day .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
eldrITCh erosIon [aMbush]
Your attack can weaken your foe’s resistance to magic .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +4d6, Knowledge (arcana) 
1 rank .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack reduces the target’s 
spell resistance and power resistance by 5 (minimum 0) 
for 10 rounds . If you use this feat a second time on a 
target before 10 rounds have elapsed, the effect of the 
first use expires .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
4d6   .
exPanded kI Pool
You know the secret mantras that grant you greater 
understanding of your ki .
 Prerequisite: Ki power . 
 Benefit: You gain three extra daily uses of your ki power 
(ki power is a class feature of the ninja; see the sidebar 
for details) .
endurIng kI
You can channel inner energy to make your ki powers 
last longer .
 Prerequisite: Ki power .
 Benefit: By spending an extra daily use of your ki 
power when you activate it, the chosen effect lasts for an 
additional round (ki power is a class feature of the ninja; 
see the sidebar for details) .
  You also gain one extra daily use of your ki power .
ePIC of The los  T kIng  
[b ardIC MusIC ]
You can channel the power of your bardic music to rein-
vigorate your allies .
 Prerequisite: Bardic music, Perform 6 ranks .
 Benefit: As a move action, you can expend one daily 
use of your bardic music ability to remove fatigue from up 
to three allies (including yourself) within 30 feet . If you 
spend three daily uses of bardic music, you can remove 
exhaustion from your allies instead .
for  TuIT ous sTrIke [luCk] 
You can hit a foe in just the right place .
 Prerequisite: Character level 6th, any luck feat .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as a swift action 
to reroll a weapon damage roll . 
  You can expend two luck rerolls as a swift action to reroll 
an attack roll .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
freerunner
You can move in more baffling ways than others .
 Prerequisite: Any two movement skill tricks .
 Benefit: You immediately learn up to two movement 
skill tricks at no cost, and your limit on skill tricks known 
increases by one . See page 82 for details on movement 
skill tricks .
 Normal: You are limited to a maximum number of skill 
tricks equal to one-half your character level .
good karMa [luCk]
You can use your luck to aid an ally—at the risk of your 
own neck .
 Prerequisite: Character level 3rd .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to redirect an attack made against an adjacent ally 
so that it is made against you instead . You must be within 
reach of the attacker (if a melee attack) or within range of 
the attack (if a ranged attack) in order to use this ability . 
  The attack roll result remains the same, but it is against 
your AC, rather than that of your ally . If the redirected 
attack hits you, you take an extra 50% damage from it .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
head sho  T [aMbush]
By striking at your opponent’s head, you can temporarily 
disrupt his thought processes .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +6d6, Weapon Focus (any 
bludgeoning weapon) .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack with a bludgeon-
ing weapon for which you have selected Weapon Focus 
leaves your foe confused for 1 round . A successful Will save 
(DC 10 + the number of extra damage dice normally dealt 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
kI PoWer (su)
A ninja can channel her ki to manifest special powers of 
stealth and mobility. She can use her ki powers a number of 
times per day equal to one-half her class level (minimum 1) 
+ her Wisdom bonus (if any). Ki powers can be used only if 
a ninja is wearing no armor and is unencumbered.
    As long as a ninja’s ki pool isn’t empty (that is, as long 
as she has at least one daily use remaining), she gains a +2 
bonus on her Will saves.
    A ninja’s ki powers are ghost step, ki dodge, ghost strike, 
greater ki dodge, and ghost walk. (Complete Adventurer 5)


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
by your sneak attack + your Dex modifier) negates this 
effect . If you use this feat a second time on a target before 
1 round has elapsed, the effect of the first use expires .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
5d6   .
 Special: You must be able to reach your foe’s head to 
use this feat with a melee attack .
healer’s luCk [luCk] 
Your spells can heal more damage .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as a swift 
action to reroll the number of points of damage healed 
by a conjuration (healing) spell you have just cast on your 
current turn .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
IMP  ed Ing aTTaCk [aMbush]
Your strikes render your target temporarily clumsy and 
awkward .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +4d6 .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack imposes a –2 
penalty on the target’s Strength and Dexterity checks, 
as well as on any Strength- and Dexterity-based skill 
checks, for 10 rounds . If you use this feat a second time 
on a target before 10 rounds have elapsed, the effect of 
the first use expires .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
3d6   .
IMP  roved faMI  lIar
You can acquire a new familiar from a nonstandard list 
of creatures .
 Prerequisite: Ability to acquire a new familiar, compat-
ible alignment, sufficiently high arcane spellcaster level .
 Benefit: When you choose a familiar, the creatures 
on the table below are also available . You can choose a fa-
miliar with an alignment up to one step away on each of 
the alignment axes (lawful 
through chaotic, 
good through evil) . For example, a chaotic good spellcaster 
could acquire a neutral familiar . A lawful neutral spell-
caster could acquire a neutral good familiar . 
  Except as noted here, improved familiars otherwise use 
the normal rules for familiars (PH 52)   .
		Arcane	
Familiar	Alignment	Caster	Level
Monstrous centipede, Small N 2nd
Badger N 3rd
Monstrous scorpion, Small N 3rd
Viper, Medium N 3rd
Monstrous spider, Small N 4th
Vargouille* NE 6th
Mephit, any N 7th
* Vargouilles summoned as familiars do not possess the 
kiss supernatural ability.
 Special: This feat was originally presented on page 200 
of the DMG; the description here provides new alternatives 
for arcane spellcasters who want familiars stealthy and 
versatile enough to follow them anywhere .
IMP  roved skIrMI  sh
With a few extra steps, you gain even greater benefits from 
your skirmishing combat style .
 Prerequisite: Skirmish +2d6/+1 AC . 
 Benefit: If you move at least 20 feet away from where 
you were at the start of your turn, your skirmish damage 
increases by 2d6 and your competence bonus to AC from 
skirmish improves by 2 .
 Normal: A scout’s bonus damage and AC bonus apply 
if she moves at least 10 feet away from where she was at 
the start of her turn (see the skirmish class feature in the 
sidebar on page 25) .
 Special: A scout can select Improved Skirmish as one 
of her scout bonus feats (Complete Adventurer 13)   . 
With a timely Head Shot, a foe literally won’t know what hit him
Illus. by E. Widermann


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
luCkY b  reak [luCk] 
You can hit an object in just the right place .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as a swift action 
to reroll a Strength check made to break an item or burst 
open a door . 
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
luCkY CaTC  h [luCk]
Your good fortune can help prevent you from falling to 
your doom .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to reroll a Balance, Climb, or Jump check .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
luCkY fIngers [luCk]
The winds of fortune guide your hands when you most 
need luck .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to reroll a Disable Device, Open Lock, or Sleight of 
Hand check .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
luCkY sTarT [luCk] 
Sometimes your luck overcomes a slow natural reaction .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll to reroll an 
initiative check . 
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
 Special: Unlike most other luck feats, using Lucky Start 
requires no action .
MagIC al for  Tune [luCk]
Even you are sometimes surprised by how well your 
spells work .
 Prerequisite: Caster level 3rd, any luck feat .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as a swift action 
to reroll the damage dealt by a spell you have just cast . 
  You can expend two luck rerolls as a swift action to reroll 
a caster level check .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
Make Your oWn luCk [luCk] 
Your hard work lets you exploit minor loopholes .
 Prerequisite: Character level 6th, any luck feat .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to reroll a skill check, as long as you have at least 1 
rank in that skill . 
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
MarTI  al sTalker
You practice a powerful fighting style that focuses equally 
on martial skill and mystical dedication .
 Prerequisite: Proficiency with all martial weapons, 
ki power .
 Benefit: Your fighter and ninja levels stack for the 
purpose of determining the size of your ki pool, as well as 
your AC bonus . For example, a 5th-level fighter/1st-level 
ninja with this feat could use his ki powers a number of 
times equal to 3 (one-half his ninja and fighter levels) + his 
Wisdom bonus (if any), and would have a +1 bonus to AC 
(as if he were a 6th-level ninja) .
  Your fighter and ninja levels also stack for the purpose of 
qualifying for feats that require a minimum fighter level, 
such as Greater Weapon Focus .
 Special: A fighter can select Martial Stalker as one of 
his fighter bonus feats (PH 38) .
MasTer sPellThIef
Your arcane studies allow you to mingle arcane magic of 
different flavors for great effect .
 Prerequisite: Ability to cast 2nd-level arcane spells, 
steal spell .
 Benefit: Your spellthief levels stack with levels of other 
arcane spellcaster classes (that is, levels of any class that grants 
arcane spellcasting other than the spellthief) for the purpose 
of determining what level of spell you can steal . For example, 
a 4th-level spellthief/4th-level wizard could steal spells of 
up to 4th level, as if he were an 8th-level spellthief .
  Your spellthief and arcane spellcaster levels also stack 
when determining your caster level for all arcane spells . 
The character described above would have a caster level of 
8th for both his spellthief spells and his wizard spells .
  In addition, you do not incur a chance of arcane spell 
failure for arcane spells cast or stolen from other classes, 
but only if you are wearing light armor . You incur the 
normal arcane spell failure chance when wearing medium 
or heavy armor or when using a shield .
 Normal: A spellthief does not incur a chance of arcane 
spell failure when casting spellthief spells in light armor . 
He incurs the normal arcane spell failure chance for other 
arcane spells he casts, including those stolen from arcane 
casters (Complete Adventurer 15)   .
MerCI  ful sTrIke [aMbush]
You can strike a creature’s vital areas without killing it .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +2d6 .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack deals nonlethal 
damage . When using this feat, you can ignore the usual 
–4 penalty on attack rolls for attempting to deal nonlethal 
damage with a lethal weapon .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 1d6 .
MInd dra  In [aMbush]
Your attack can weaken your opponent’s mental powers .
 Prerequisite: Power point reserve, sneak attack +2d6 .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack drains power points 
from your target equal to its manifester level (minimum 
1)  . If this attack reduces your target to 0 power points, the 
opponent also loses any psionic focus . A target that has 
no power points when you make the sneak attack is not 
affected by this feat . You can’t use this feat on the same 
target more than once per round .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 1d6 .

0
Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
MIser’s for  Tune [luCk]
Items belonging to you and your allies are abnormally 
resistant to damage .
 Benefit: Whenever an opponent makes a sunder attack 
or Strength check to damage an object within 30 feet of 
you, you can expend one luck reroll as an immediate action 
to force that opponent to reroll .
  In addition, as long as you still have one luck reroll 
remaining for the day, items in your possession receive a 
+5 luck bonus on saving throws . 
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
PersIsTen  T aTTaCker [aMbush]
Once you find a target’s weak point, you can easily strike 
it again .
 Prerequisite: Sneak attack +5d6 .
 Benefit: If your sneak attack hits, your first attack 
against that creature on your next turn is also considered 
a sneak attack even if it wouldn’t normally qualify . 
  Using this feat reduces your first sneak attack’s damage 
by 4d6 . The resulting second sneak attack deals its full 
extra damage .
Po Ison exPer T
Your skill at crafting and delivering toxins has made you 
a more deadly poisoner .
 Prerequisite: Craft (poisonmaking) 4 ranks, poison use . 
 Benefit: Choose a type of poison (contact, ingested, 
inhaled, or injury) . The DC to resist both the initial and 
secondary damage of poisons of this type that you create 
and use increases by 1 .
  This feat has no effect on poisons used by other creatures, 
even if you craft those poisons . It also has no effect on 
natural poisons (those exuded from a creature’s body) .
 Special: You can gain this feat multiple times . Its effect 
does not stack . Each time you take the feat, it applies to a 
new type of poison .
Po Ison MasTer
The toxins you create and use are particularly virulent .
 Prerequisite: Poison Expert, Craft (poisonmaking) 8 
ranks, poison use .
 Benefit: Choose a type of poison (contact, ingested, 
inhaled, or injury) for which you have selected the Poison 
Expert feat . The initial and secondary damage dealt by poi-
sons of this type that you create and use increases by 1 point 
per die of damage (or by 1 point, if it deals a fixed amount 
of damage) . For example, lich dust used by a character with 
Poison Master (ingested) would deal initial damage of 2d6+2 
Str and secondary damage of 1d6+1 Con plus 1d6+1 Str . If 
a poison doesn’t deal damage, this feat has no effect .
  This feat has no effect on poisons used by other creatures, 
even if you craft those poisons . It also has no effect on 
natural poisons (those exuded from a creature’s body) .
 Special: You can gain this feat multiple times . Its effect 
does not stack . Each time you take the feat, it applies 
to a new type of poison for which you have selected 
Poison Expert . 
Ps IT hIef
You can drain psychic energy and use it against others .
 Prerequisite: Manifester level 1st, steal spell .
 Benefit: You can use your steal spell ability to siphon 
psionic energy instead of spell energy . Instead of stealing 
a spell, you can choose to steal a number of power points 
equal twice to the maximum level of spell you can steal 
minus 1 (up to a maximum value equal to the manifester 
level  of  the  creature  struck) .  For  example,  a  4th-level 
spellthief/1st-level  psychic  warrior  could  steal  up  to  3 
power points; if he used this ability against a 2nd-level 
psion he could steal only 2 power points, since that is the 
target’s manifester level .
  You can use the stolen power points only to manifest 
a psionic power you already know . You must use these 
power points within 1 hour of stealing them; otherwise, 
the extra psionic energy fades harmlessly away . This feat 
otherwise follows the rules for the steal spell class feature 
(Complete Adventurer 16)   .
  In  addition,  Knowledge  (psionics)  and  Psicraft  are 
spellthief class skills for you . These skills appear on page 
38 of Expanded Psionics Handbook .
Ps  YC  hIC luCk [luCk] 
Some psions claim that luck doesn’t exist . You know better .
 Prerequisite: Manifester level 3rd, any luck feat .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as a swift action 
to reroll the damage dealt by a psionic power you have just 
manifested . 
  You can expend two luck rerolls as a swift action to reroll 
a manifester level check .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
savvY r  ogue
You have mastered one or more of your rogue special 
abilities .
 Prerequisite: Rogue level 10th .
 Benefit: Based on the rogue special abilities you have 
(PH 50), you gain one or more additional special benefits 
as described below . You gain the benefits for all the special 
abilities you have, even those you gain after selecting 
this feat .
 Crippling Strike: You can deal Strength damage even 
to a target that is immune to extra damage from sneak 
attacks .
 Defensive Roll: You can use this ability three times per 
day, rather than once per day .
 Improved Evasion: You gain a +2 competence bonus on 
Reflex saves .
 Opportunist: You can use the opportunist ability as many 
times per round as you can make attacks of opportunity, but 
no more than once per creature per round . Each use of the 
opportunist ability counts as an attack of opportunity .

1
Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
 Skill Mastery: When taking 10 with a skill to which you 
have assigned skill mastery, you can treat the die roll as a 
12 instead of as a 10 . (In effect, you’re “taking 12 .”)
 Slippery Mind: You gain a +2 competence bonus on the 
extra save granted by slippery mind .
slY f  or  Tune [luCk]
Your luck helps you find the right place to move to .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an imme-
diate action to reroll a Hide, Move Silently, or Tumble 
check .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
sound of sIlenCe [b ardIC MusIC ]
You can channel the power of your bardic music to deafen 
your foes .
 Prerequisite: Bardic music, Perform 9 ranks . 
 Benefit: As a standard action, you can expend two daily 
uses of your bardic music ability to deafen a single target 
for 3 rounds . A successful Will save (using your Perform 
check result as the DC) negates the effect . The target must 
be within 30 feet of you and be able to hear you .
sure hand
You can perform more amazing displays of legerdemain 
than normal .
 Prerequisite: Any two manipulation skill tricks .
 Benefit: You immediately learn up to two manipulation 
skill tricks at no cost, and your limit on skill tricks known 
increases by one . See page 82 for details on manipulation 
skill tricks .
 Normal: You are limited to a maximum number of skill 
tricks equal to one-half your character level .
survIvor’s luCk [luCk] 
You can avoid situations that would surely affect others .
 Prerequisite: Character level 9th, any luck feat .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to reroll a saving throw you just failed .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
sW  ee  T Talker
Your social expertise is more pronounced than that of 
most others .
 Prerequisite: Any two interaction skill tricks .
 Benefit: You immediately learn up to two interaction 
skill tricks at no cost, and your limit on skill tricks known 
increases by one . See page 82 for details on interaction 
skill tricks .
 Normal: You are limited to a maximum number of skill 
tricks equal to one-half your character level .
sWIfT aMbusher
You combine your scout training with the stealth of a rogue 
to open up new methods of ambushing enemies .
 Prerequisite: Skirmish +1d6/+1 AC, sneak attack +1d6 .
 Benefit: Your rogue and scout levels stack for the purpose 
of determining the extra damage and bonus to Armor Class 
granted when skirmishing . For example, a 4th-level scout/
7th-level rogue would deal an extra 3d6 points of damage 
and gain a +3 competence bonus to AC when skirmishing, 
as if she were an 11th-level scout .
  In addition, you can qualify for ambush feats (see page 
71) as if your sneak attack bonus damage were the sum of 
your skirmish damage and sneak attack bonus damage . 
You cannot sacrifice skirmish extra damage to use those 
feats, however .
 Special: A scout can select Swift Ambusher as one of 
her scout bonus feats (Complete Adventurer 13)   . 
sWIfT hunTer
You  have  applied  the  hit-and-run  tactics  learned  from 
scouting to your strong hunting abilities . 
 Prerequisite: Favored enemy, skirmish +1d6/+1 AC .
 Benefit: Your ranger and scout levels stack for the purpose 
of determining the extra damage and bonus to Armor Class 
granted when skirmishing . For example, a 4th-level scout/1st-
level ranger would deal an extra 2d6 points of damage and 
gain a +1 competence bonus to AC when skirmishing, as 
if she were a 5th-level scout .
  Your ranger and scout levels also stack for the purpose of 
determining when you select additional favored enemies, 
as well as the total bonus granted against your favored 
enemies . For example, a 4th-level scout/1st-level ranger 
would have two favored enemies and could allocate an 
extra +2 bonus against one of those favored enemies, as if 
she were a 5th-level ranger .
  In addition, your skirmish extra damage applies against 
any creature you have selected as a favored enemy, even if 
it is normally immune to extra damage from critical hits 
or skirmish attacks .
 Special: A scout can select Swift Hunter as one of her 
scout bonus feats (Complete Adventurer 13)   . 
Te  MPTIng faTe [luCk] 
You are very hard to kill .
 Prerequisite: Character level 6th, any luck feat .
 Benefit: You can expend a luck reroll to reroll a stabiliza-
tion check .
  In addition, once per day, whenever you have at least 1 
hit point remaining and would be dealt enough damage to 
kill you, you can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to take only enough damage to reduce you to –9 hit 
points . You automatically stabilize .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
 Special: Unlike most other luck feats, using Tempting 
Fate requires no action .
Th  Ird TIM e’s The CharM [luCk]
Your deity smiles upon you .
 Prerequisite: Character level 3rd, any luck feat, access 
to the Luck domain .

2
Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as an immediate 
action to use the granted power of the Luck domain an addi-
tional time per day . You can only use this benefit immediately 
after using the Luck domain’s granted power (in effect, this 
feat gives you a third chance to succeed on the roll) .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
ThroaT PunCh [aMbush]
By making a precise punch to the throat, you can render 
a target unable to speak effectively .
 Prerequisite: Improved Unarmed Strike, sneak attack 
+3d6 .
 Benefit: Your successful sneak attack delivered with an 
unarmed strike temporarily hinders the target’s ability to 
speak . For the next 3 rounds, the target takes a –5 penalty 
on any skill check requiring speech and has a 50% chance 
of failure when casting a spell with a verbal component or 
activating a magic item with a command word . Multiple uses 
of this feat don’t increase the duration beyond 3 rounds .
  Using this feat reduces your sneak attack damage by 
2d6   .
 Special: You must be able to reach your foe’s neck to 
use this feat .
unbelIevable luCk [luCk]
The powers of fortune truly smile on you more than 
most mortals .
 Prerequisite: Any luck feat .
 Benefit: As long as you have at least one luck reroll 
remaining for the day, you gain a +2 luck bonus on which-
ever of your saves has the lowest base bonus . If two or more 
of your saves tie for the lowest base bonus, choose when 
you select this feat which save it applies to . 
  If your base save bonuses later change so that the chosen 
save no longer has the lowest base bonus, the luck bonus 
from this feat immediately applies to the save that now 
has the lowest base bonus .
  You gain two luck rerolls per day .
vICTor’s luCk [luCk]
You strike with devastating accuracy more often .
 Benefit: You can expend one luck reroll as a swift action 
to reroll a critical threat confirmation roll .
  You gain one luck reroll per day .
WarnIng shouT [b ardIC MusIC ]
The force of your performance is so potent that it can 
guide an ally to safety .
 Prerequisite: Bardic music, Perform 9 ranks, evasion . 
 Benefit: As an immediate action, you can expend two 
daily uses of your bardic music ability to grant a single ally 
(other than yourself) a +5 morale bonus on her next Reflex 
save and evasion (see the monk class feature, PH 41)   . The 
ally must be within 30 feet of you and able to see or hear 
you   . The effect lasts until the target rolls a Reflex save or 
until the start of your turn, whichever comes first .
skIll TrIC ks
Skill tricks are an exciting new way of customizing 
your scoundrel, allowing her to perform such cinematic 
effects as swinging across a chasm hanging from a whip, 
leaping off a warhorse while swinging a sword, jumping 
and running up a wall, and other similar actions popular 
in movies but until now unsupported in the D&D rules . 
Because they require the expenditure of skill points, skill 
tricks appeal most strongly to members of those character 
classes that focus on skills . 
  The four types of skill tricks are interaction, manipu-
lation, mental, and movement . Each type focuses on a 
different subset of skills . While any character can learn 
tricks of any type, members of certain classes favor par-
ticular types of tricks (whether due to the class’s skill list, 
the character’s areas of expertise, or both) .
 Interaction: These skill tricks influence social interac-
tion between PCs and NPCs . They typically rely on skills 
used in those situations, such as Bluff, Diplomacy, and 
Sense Motive . Bards are the most common masters of these 
skill tricks, but anyone who relies on social interaction 
to achieve their goals—from bold paladins to boisterous 
sorcerers—can benefit from them .
 Manipulation: A manipulation skill trick depends on 
the character’s manual dexterity to perform some act of 
legerdemain . Such tricks use skills that employ similar 
talents, including Disable Device, Open Lock, and Sleight 
of Hand . Rogues and ninjas often boast a few manipulation 
tricks in their repertoire .
 Mental: These tricks pit the mind and senses of the 
character against an opponent . Mental tricks focus on 
skills such as Concentration, Knowledge, and Spot . Since 
this category includes a wide range of skills, many different 
characters dabble in such tricks .
 Movement: As the name suggests, movement tricks 
typically involve the character physically moving from 
one location to another . They use skills that come into 
play during movement, such as Balance, Jump, Move 
Silently, and Tumble . Monks, barbarians, and scouts 
are most likely to learn such tricks, but anyone looking 
for an edge on the battlefield has something to gain 
from them .
learnIng skIll TrIC ks
Learning a skill trick costs 2 skill points . Whenever 
you acquire skill points, you can choose to spend skill 
points to acquire a skill trick instead of purchasing ranks 
in skills . 
  You can learn any skill trick, as long as you meet the 
prerequisite and can afford to expend 2 skill points . If you 
later no longer meet the prerequisite for a skill trick, you 
can’t use it again until you once more qualify .
  You can’t learn more than one skill trick at any given 
level, and your total skill tricks cannot exceed one-half 
your character level (rounded up) . Certain feats and 


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
prestige class features allow a character to exceed these 
limits . If you use the retraining rules in Player’s Handbook 
II, you can choose to unlearn any one skill trick when you 
attain a new level, assigning the reclaimed skill points as 
you wish (either to buy skill ranks or to learn a different 
skill trick) .
  You can learn a skill trick only once; you either know 
it or you don’t .
Table 3–2: Skill Tricks
Interaction	Prerequisites	Benefit
Assume Quirk Disguise 5 ranks Familiar viewers get no bonus to see through your disguise
Group Fake-Out Bluff 8 ranks Feint against multiple foes simultaneously
Never Outnumbered Intimidate 8 ranks Demoralize multiple foes in combat simultaneously
Second Impression Bluff 5 ranks, Disguise 5 ranks Make Bluff check to reestablish blown disguise
Social Recovery Bluff 8 ranks, Diplomacy 5 ranks Make Bluff check to replace a failed Diplomacy check
Timely Misdirection Bluff 8 ranks Successful feint allows you to avoid attacks of opportunity
Manipulation	Prerequisites	Benefit
Clever Improviser Disable Device 5 ranks,  Ignore penalty for Disable Device and Open Lock checks 
 Open Lock 5 ranks  made without tools
Conceal Spellcasting Concentration 1 rank, Sleight of  Conceal your spellcasting from onlookers
 Hand 5 ranks, Spellcraft 1 rank
Easy Escape Medium or smaller size,  Gain bonus on check to escape grapple or pin
 Escape Artist 8 ranks 
False Theurgy Bluff or Sleight of Hand 8 ranks,  Your spell appears to be another spell of the same level
 Spellcraft 8 ranks 
Healing Hands Heal 5 ranks Heal 1d6 damage when you stabilize a dying character
Hidden Blade Sleight of Hand 5 ranks, Quick Draw    Draw hidden weapon as move action; treat foe as flat-footed
Mosquito’s Bite Sleight of Hand 12 ranks Flat-footed target does not notice damage you deal 
  with a light weapon
Opening Tap Open Lock 12 ranks Open a lock as a swift action
Quick Escape Escape Artist 12 ranks Escape from grapple or restraints more quickly than normal
Shrouded Dance Hide 8 ranks, Perform (dance)  Use move action to gain concealment for 1 round
 5 ranks 
Sudden Draw Sleight of Hand 8 ranks,  Draw hidden weapon as part of attack of opportunity
 Quick Draw 
Whip Climber Use Rope 5 ranks,  Use a whip as a grappling hook
 proficiency with whip
Mental	Prerequisites	Benefit
Clarity of Vision Spot 12 ranks Notice invisible enemies for 1 round
Collector of Stories Knowledge (any) 5 ranks Gain +5 bonus on Knowledge checks to identify monsters 
Listen to This Listen 5 ranks Perfectly repeat what you’ve recently heard 
Magical Appraisal Appraise 5 ranks, Knowledge  Determine properties of magic items
 (arcana) 5 ranks, Spellcraft 12 ranks
Point it Out Spot 8 ranks Grant ally a free Spot check to see something you’ve spotted
Spot the Weak Point Spot 12 ranks  Make your next attack a touch attack 
Swift Concentration Concentration 12 ranks Maintain concentration on spell as swift action
Movement	Prerequisites	Benefit
Acrobatic Backstab Tumble 12 ranks Move through foe’s space to render it flat-footed
Back on Your Feet Tumble 12 ranks React immediately to stand up from prone
Corner Perch Climb 8 ranks Perch in chimney or corner to leave hands free
Dismount Attack Ride 5 ranks Make a fast dismount from moving mount to charge a foe
Escape Attack Escape Artist 8 ranks Make an attack the same round you escape a grapple
Extreme Leap Jump 5 ranks Horizontal jump of at least 10 feet allows 10 extra feet 
  of movement that round
Leaping Climber Climb 5 ranks, Jump 5 ranks Add jump distance to start of climb
Nimble Charge Balance 5 ranks Run or charge across difficult surface without Balance check
Nimble Stand Tumble 8 ranks Stand from prone safely
Quick Swimmer Swim 5 ranks Swim 10 additional feet with successful check
Slipping Past Escape Artist 5 ranks,  Move into tight space without penalties
 Tumble 5 ranks 
Speedy Ascent Climb 5 ranks Climb 10 additional feet with successful check
Tumbling Crawl Tumble 5 ranks Crawl 5 feet without provoking attacks of opportunity
Twisted Charge Balance 5 ranks, Tumble 5 ranks Make one direction change during a charge
Up the Hill Balance 5 ranks, Jump 5 ranks Move up slope or stairs at normal speed
Walk the Walls Climb 12 ranks, Tumble 5 ranks Run straight up wall for 1 round
Wall Jumper Climb 5 ranks, Jump 5 ranks Leap from wall as if making a running jump


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
usIng skIll TrIC ks
Skill tricks are special maneuvers, so you can’t just use 
them as often as you want . Unless otherwise noted, a skill 
trick can be performed only once per encounter (or once 
per minute, for scenes that don’t involve combat or other 
conflict) . This restriction sets skill tricks apart from feats 
and class features, which are often repeatable . 
  Typically,  performing  a  skill  trick  is  either  part  of 
another action or an action in itself . Each skill trick’s 
description  specifies  what  sort  of  action,  if  any,  is 
required .
  A skill trick usually either requires a successful skill 
check to pull off, or it “piggybacks” on a skill check you’re 
already making . For example, the Extreme Leap trick 
functions only if you’ve already succeeded on a DC 20 
Jump check (or DC 10 with a running start) to make a 
horizontal jump; it doesn’t require a separate Jump check . 
Exceptions to this general rule are noted in the skill trick 
descriptions .
  Using a skill trick does not provoke attacks of opportu-
nity unless its description specifically states that it does 
(or it involves an action that would normally provoke 
attacks of opportunity, such as moving out of a threatened 
square) .
Tr  IC k des  CrIPTIons
The skill tricks your character can learn are presented 
alphabetically and follow the format presented below . 
skIll TrIC k naMe [T YP  e of TrIC k]
Description  of  what  the  trick  lets  you  do,  in  plain 
language .
 Prerequisite: A minimum ability score, a feat or feats, 
a minimum number of ranks in one or more skills, or any 
other attribute required to learn the skill trick .
 Benefit: What the skill trick enables the character (“you” 
in the trick description) to do . Learning the same skill 
trick more than once gives you no extra benefit, nor does 
it let you use that skill trick more often than normal .
aC  robaTIC baCks  Tab [MoveMen  T]
You dart past your opponent’s attacks, ending up perfectly 
positioned for a devastating counterattack .
 Prerequisite: Tumble 12 ranks .
 Benefit: If you succeed on a Tumble check to move 
through an enemy’s space, you can treat that enemy as 
flat-footed against the next melee attack you make against 
it on your current turn .
  Your enemy must be standing on the ground or floor in 
order for you to use this trick . 
A combat against  
tricky rogues turns bad  
for the city guard
Illus. by C. Frank


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
assuMe quIrk [InTeraCTIon]
You can perfectly imitate a small habit or idiosyncrasy of a 
person you impersonate in order to throw off suspicion .
 Prerequisite: Disguise 5 ranks .
 Benefit: When impersonating a particular individual, 
you can eliminate the normal Spot bonus granted to a 
viewer familiar with that individual (PH 73)   . The effect 
extends to all viewers .
  Using this trick requires no special action, but you can 
maintain the deception for only 1 hour per day . 
baCk on Your fee  T [MoveMen  T]
You can hop back to your feet instantly if you fall .
 Prerequisite: Tumble 12 ranks .
 Benefit: If you fall prone for any reason, you can stand 
up as an immediate action without provoking attacks 
of opportunity . 
ClarITY of vIsIon [MenTal]
You can briefly see invisible opponents .
 Prerequisite: Spot 12 ranks .
 Benefit: As a swift action, you can attempt a DC 20 Spot 
check . If successful, you focus your vision so clearly that 
you can pinpoint the location of invisible creatures within 
30 feet . This clarity lasts until the end of your turn .
Clever IMP  rovIser 
[ManIP ulaTI  on]
Tools? Why would you need tools? It’s just a combination 
lock with a poison needle trap, after all .
 Prerequisite: Disable Device 5 ranks, Open Lock 
5 ranks .
 Benefit: When making a Disable Device or Open Lock 
check without using thieves’ tools, you ignore the normal 
–2 penalty .
  You can use this trick any number of times per day 
until you fail a Disable Device or Open Lock check made 
without using thieves’ tools . After a failure, you can’t use 
Clever Improviser again until after you have rested for 
8 hours .
ColleCT  or of sTor  Ies [MenTal]
You’ve heard so many tales of legendary monsters that you 
remember all sorts of gory details .
 Prerequisite: Knowledge (any) 5 ranks .
 Benefit: When you attempt a trained Knowledge check 
to identify a creature or to learn its special powers or vulner-
abilities, you gain a +5 competence bonus on the check .
ConCeal sPellCas  TI  ng 
[ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can cast spells without others noticing . 
 Prerequisite: Concentration 1 rank, Sleight of Hand 5 
ranks, Spellcraft 1 rank .
 Benefit: You can cast a spell without revealing that you 
are doing so . Make a Sleight of Hand check as part of the 
action used to cast the spell, opposed by the Spot checks 
of onlookers . If you are successful, an observer can’t tell 
that you’re casting a spell . That observer cannot make an 
attack of opportunity against you for casting, nor can it 
attempt to counter your spell .
Corner PerCh [MoveMen  T]
You  can  brace  yourself  against  walls  to  leave  your 
hands free .
 Prerequisite: Climb 8 ranks .
 Benefit: If you succeed on a Climb check to ascend or 
descend either a “chimney,” where you can brace against 
opposite walls, or a corner where you can brace against 
perpendicular walls (PH 69), you can suspend yourself 
momentarily . Until the end of your next turn, you can 
use your hands freely for any other purpose (including 
attacking) without risk of falling . At the end of your next 
turn, you fall from the wall unless you succeed on a Climb 
check against the normal DC + 5 (made as a move action) 
or you have succeeded on another Climb check to move 
up or down the wall as normal .
 Example: Ember the monk succeeds on a DC 15 Climb 
check to scramble up 10 feet (one-quarter of her speed) 
into a corner formed by two typical dungeon walls . Using 
Corner Perch, she then braces her legs against the walls 
and uses her remaining standard action to draw and 
throw a shuriken at a bugbear on the ground below her . 
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
pqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqrs
beh  Ind The CurTaIn:  
skIll TrIC ks and fea Ts
At first glance, skill tricks resemble feats both in their presenta-
tion and their effects. So, what makes a skill trick different from 
a feat? Three factors help set skill tricks apart.
 Scope	of	Effect: Most skill tricks allow a character to perform 
an action that, while interesting and useful, doesn’t equal the 
power level of a typical feat. Acrobatic Backstab is a potent trick, 
but in the long run it’s not nearly as significant as Rapid Shot, 
Cleave, or Spring Attack. A skill trick should never provide a 
benefit as good as that of a feat.
 Limited	Use: Because a character usually can use a skill trick 
only once per encounter, a trick never becomes as important in 
a character’s arsenal as a feat (which usually functions as often 
as needed). 
 All	about	Skills: Skill tricks have a skill rank prerequisite, a 
skill point cost, and (in most cases) a skill check requirement. 
These conditions place tricks firmly in the hands of a specific 
subset of characters—those with plenty of skill points to meet 
prerequisites, buy tricks, and succeed on the skill checks neces-
sary to pull off the tricks. In addition, skill tricks allow characters 
a different application for their skill points, a resource that until 
now has had only one outlet.


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
On her next turn, still braced in the corner, she draws her 
quarterstaff and attacks an ogre that has moved next to her, 
gaining a +1 bonus on the attack roll for higher ground . At 
the end of that turn, she drops from the wall rather than 
attempting to hold her position . Since she has the slow fall 
class feature, Ember takes no damage from the drop .
dI  sMounT aTTaCk [MoveMen  T]
You can leap out of the saddle onto a foe .
 Prerequisite: Ride 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If your mount has moved at least 10 feet in this 
round and you succeed on a fast dismount (Ride, PH 80), 
you can use a standard action to attack an adjacent opponent 
as if you had charged that opponent .
eas  Y esCaPe [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can slip free from the grasp of a larger enemy with 
ease    .
 Prerequisite: Medium or smaller size, Escape Artist 
8 ranks .
 Benefit: If your opponent is larger than Medium, you 
gain a circumstance bonus on your Escape Artist check to 
escape a grapple or pin . The size of the bonus depends on 
your opponent’s size, according to the following table .
Opponent	Escape	Artist
Size	Bonus
Large +4
Huge +8
Gargantuan +12
Colossal +16
esCaPe   aTTaCk [MoveMen  T]
You can follow a successful escape with a swift attack .
 Prerequisite: Escape Artist 8 ranks .
 Benefit: When you escape a grapple, you can make a 
single melee attack with a light weapon as a swift action 
against the opponent that was grappling you . The opponent 
is considered flat-footed against this attack . You must have 
the weapon in hand at the beginning of your turn in order 
to use this trick .
exTreMe   lea  P [MoveMen  T]
Your extraordinary leaping ability carries you over great 
distances .
 Prerequisite: Jump 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If you make a horizontal jump of at least 10 feet 
during your turn, you can spend a swift action to move an 
additional 10 feet on that turn .
false TheurgY [ManIP ulaTI  on]
“How’s that magic missile feel? I’m sorry—did you think I 
was casting sleep?”
 Prerequisite: Bluff or Sleight of Hand 8 ranks, Spellcraft 
8 ranks .
 Benefit:  As  a  swift  action  when  casting  a  spell,  you 
can adjust the spell’s verbal and somatic components to 
Ember uses Corner Perch to stay out of an opponent’s reach
Illus. by E. Widermann


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
mimic those of another spell of your choice of the same 
level    . Any creature using Spellcraft or any other means to 
identify the spell you’re casting believes it to be the other 
spell instead . 
  This  trick  renders  your  spell  immune  to  the  normal 
method of counterspelling, though dispel magic or a similar 
effect still works normally . Of course, once the spell takes 
effect, it can be identified and dealt with normally (a fireball 
still looks and feels like a fireball once you’ve cast it) .
grouP fake-ouT [InTeraCTIon]
You lean left, go right, and leave a whole group of enemies 
holding the bag .
 Prerequisite: Bluff 8 ranks .
 Benefit: You can use Bluff to feint in combat (PH 68) 
against more than one opponent . Make one Bluff check 
opposed by separate Sense Motive checks for each opponent . 
For each opponent after the first that you wish to affect, you 
take a cumulative –2 penalty on your Bluff check .
 Example: Lidda wants to feint against a group of three 
orcs, so she rolls a Bluff check with a –4 penalty . Each orc 
rolls a separate Sense Motive check opposed by Lidda’s 
adjusted Bluff check result . 
healIng hands [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can bring someone back from the brink of death .
 Prerequisite: Heal 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If you succeed on a Heal check made to stabilize 
a dying character, that character also heals 1d6 points of 
damage .
hI  dden blade [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can quickly draw a hidden weapon to make a deadly 
strike .
 Prerequisite: Sleight of Hand 5 ranks, Quick Draw .
 Benefit: After you have used the Sleight of Hand skill 
to successfully conceal a weapon (PH 81), you can draw 
that weapon as a move action instead of a standard action . 
An opponent that was unaware of the concealed weapon 
is treated as flat-footed against the first attack you make in 
that turn .
lea  PI ng ClIM ber [MoveMen  T]
There’s no better way to start a tough climb than by leaping 
up the wall .
 Prerequisite: Climb 5 ranks, Jump 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If you begin a climb by making a Jump check 
as a swift action, you can add the vertical distance of your 
jump to the distance climbed in that round . Treat the Jump 
check as being made with a running start even if you didn’t 
move at least 20 feet .
 Example:  Ember  the  monk  is  standing  at  the  base  of 
a craggy cliff and wants to scale the cliff as quickly as 
possible . She spends a swift action to make a Jump check 
and gets a result of 24 . Thus, she adds 6 feet to the distance 
she climbs in that round .
lI sTen To ThIs [MenTal]
You can perfectly repeat to others what you hear .
 Prerequisite: Listen 5 ranks .
 Benefit: Whenever you make a successful Listen check 
to hear a noise, you can describe that sound any time 
up to 1 hour later with such clarity that any individuals 
hearing the description are treated as if they had heard 
the sound themselves .
  This trick is particularly useful if you overhear a conver-
sation but don’t understand the language spoken, since it 
allows you to repeat it verbatim to an ally who might be 
able to translate . 
MagIC al aPPra  Isal [MenTal]
You can judge the usefulness of magic items .
 Prerequisite: Appraise 5 ranks, Knowledge (arcana) 5 
ranks, Spellcraft 12 ranks .
 Benefit: When you succeed by 5 or more on a Spell-
craft check to determine the school of magic of the aura 
surrounding a magic item (by casting detect magic), you 
can then spend 1 minute concentrating to also learn the 
properties of the item, as if you had cast identify.
  You can use this skill trick once per day .
MosquIT o’s bITe [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can deliver a vicious strike without your target feel-
ing a thing .
 Prerequisite: Sleight of Hand 12 ranks .
 Benefit: If you use a light weapon to hit a flat-footed 
opponent, you can choose to have the opponent not 
realize that it has been hit until the start of your next 
turn    . Instead, that opponent reacts as if you had attacked 
and missed . 
  Using this skill trick doesn’t require an action on 
your part .
  This trick doesn’t allow the opponent to ignore any of 
the other effects of your attack, such as ability damage 
from poison on your blade or falling unconscious when 
reduced to fewer than 0 hit points .
never ouTnuMbered 
[InTeraCTIon]
You can demoralize multiple enemies .
 Prerequisite: Intimidate 8 ranks .
 Benefit: When you use Intimidate to demoralize an oppo-
nent (PH 76), you can affect all enemies within 10 feet that 
can see you, rather than only a single enemy you threaten . 
Each enemy rolls a separate modified level check to oppose 
your Intimidate check, but the skill check otherwise works 
as normal .
nIMble Charge [MoveMen  T]
You can run across treacherous surfaces with ease .
 Prerequisite: Balance 5 ranks .
 Benefit: You can run or charge across a difficult surface 
without needing to make a Balance check (PH 67)   .


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
nIMble sTand [MoveMen  T]
You can rely on your acrobatic talent to stand up from 
prone safely .
 Prerequisite: Tumble 8 ranks .
 Benefit: You can stand up from prone without provok-
ing attacks of opportunity . 
oP  en Ing TaP [ManIP ulaTI  on]
“No time to waste on tools—a sharp tap should pop 
that lock!”
 Prerequisite: Open Lock 12 ranks .
 Benefit: As a swift action, you can make an Open Lock 
check with a –10 penalty by tapping a lock with a hard, 
blunt object such as the pommel of a weapon . You don’t 
take any additional penalty for making the check without 
thieves’ tools .
  You can use this trick any number of times per day until 
you fail an Open Lock check made in this way . After a 
failure, you can’t use Opening Tap again until after you 
have rested for 8 hours .
Po InT I  T ouT [MenTal]
You can show others what you see .
 Prerequisite: Spot 8 ranks .
 Benefit: When you make a successful Spot check, you 
can spend an immediate action to grant a single ally a free 
Spot check to see the same thing (with a +2 circumstance 
bonus) . Your ally must be within 30 feet of you and able to 
see or hear you to benefit from this effect .
quIC k esCaP  e [ManIP ulaTI  on]
In the blink of an eye, you can escape nearly any tight spot .
 Prerequisite: Escape Artist 12 ranks .
 Benefit: This trick has two options, either of which can 
be used once per encounter . 
  You can make an Escape Artist check to escape from a 
grapple or pin as a swift action . You can use this trick even 
if you have already used a standard action on your current 
turn to attempt the same escape .
  Alternatively, you can make any Escape Artist check 
that would normally require a full-round action as a move 
action . You can’t use this option more than once per day 
against the same kind of restraint .
quIC k sWIMMer [MoveMen  T]
You can push yourself to swim faster .
 Prerequisite: Swim 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If you succeed on a Swim check to move at 
least 10 feet, you can move an extra 10 feet as part of 
that action .
seCond IMP  ressIon [InTeraCTIon]
You can convince someone of your false identity even after 
your disguise fails .
 Prerequisite: Bluff 5 ranks, Disguise 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If an observer sees through your disguise with 
a successful Spot check, you can (as an immediate action) 
attempt a Bluff check to convince him that he’s mistaken . 
Use the observer’s Spot check result as the DC for your 
Bluff check; if you succeed, the observer ignores the 
Devis uses Mosquito’s Bite to skewer an unsuspecting hobgoblin
Illus. by F. Vohwinkel


Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
evidence of his own senses in favor of what your disguise 
attempts to show . 
  You must be aware of the observer’s discovery in order to 
use this trick; for example, you can’t use it against someone 
viewing you secretly, nor can you use it against someone 
who sees through your disguise but keeps that information 
secret . When in doubt, the DM should allow a character 
to use this trick if she has any reason to fear that her cover 
has been blown .
  You can use this trick only once per day, but its effect 
extends to all viewers within 30 feet of you . For example, you 
could attempt it against an entire patrol of guards confront-
ing you just as effectively as against a single person .
  This trick doesn’t let you maintain a disguise that has 
been defeated by other means; for example, if your disguise 
self spell is penetrated by a true seeing spell, Second Impres-
sion won’t help .
shrouded dan  Ce [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can seem to be where you aren’t .
 Prerequisite: Hide 8 ranks, Perform (dance) 5 ranks .
 Benefit: As a move action, you can attempt a DC 20 Hide 
check . If you succeed, you have concealment until the start 
of your next turn .
soCI  al reCoverY [InTeraCTIon]
You can talk your way out of a problem you talked your-
self into .
 Prerequisite: Bluff 8 ranks, Diplomacy 5 
ranks .
 Benefit: If your Diplomacy check to in-
fluence an NPC’s attitude fails, you can 
spend another full round talk-
ing to the NPC, then make a 
Bluff check with a –10 penalty . 
Use the result of this check in 
place of the Diplomacy check 
result, except that it can’t im-
prove the NPC’s attitude by 
more than one step .
  Once you use this skill 
trick  (successfully  or 
not),  you  cannot  use  it 
against  the  same  target 
again for 24 hours .
slIPPIng PasT 
[MoveMen  T]
You can slip through 
a tight space without 
breaking stride .
 Prerequisite: 
 Escape  Artist  5  ranks, 
Tumble 5 ranks .
 Benefit: As a swift action, 
you can ignore the additional move-
ment cost and penalty on attack rolls and to AC when 
squeezing through a narrow space (PH 148)    . The benefit 
lasts until the start of your next turn .
sP eedY asCen  T [MoveMen  T]
You can produce a burst of speed when climbing .
 Prerequisite: Climb 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If you succeed on a Climb check to move at least 
10 feet, you can move an extra 10 feet as part of that action .
sP oT T  he Weak PoInT [MenTal]
Your keen eyes allow you to place attacks where they’ll 
do the most good .
 Prerequisite: Spot 12 ranks .
 Benefit: As a standard action, you can attempt a Spot 
check to find a weakness in your opponent’s defenses . The 
DC of this check equals the opponent’s AC . If the check 
succeeds, your next attack against that opponent (which 
must be made no later than your next turn) is treated as a 
touch attack .
  If you use a ranged weapon to deliver the attack, your 
opponent must be within 30 feet of you in order for you 
to benefit from the trick .
sudden dra  W [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can quickly draw a hidden weapon to make a deadly 
strike .
 Prerequisite: Sleight of Hand 8 ranks, Quick Draw .
Her Sudden Draw trick puts Lidda on the offensive
Illus. by H. Lyon

0
Cha  PT  er 3
fea Ts and 
skIll
 
Tr  IC ks
 Benefit:  If  an  opponent  provokes  an  attack  of 
opportunity from you, you can draw a weapon that 
you have successfully concealed using Sleight of 
Hand (PH 81) as an immediate action to deliver 
the attack of opportunity with that weapon . That 
opponent is treated as flat-footed against the attack 
with the concealed weapon .
sWIfT ConCen  Tra  TI  on 
[MenTal]
You  can  maintain  your  mental  focus  while 
attending to another task .
 Prerequisite: Concentration 12 ranks .
 Benefit: You can maintain concentration on a 
spell or similar effect as a swift action .
TIM el Y MIsd Ire  CTIon 
[InTeraCTIon]
You  can  divert  an  opponent’s  attention  to  avoid  its 
attacks .
 Prerequisite: Bluff 8 ranks .
 Benefit: If you succeed on a Bluff check to feint in 
combat (PH 68), your opponent can’t make any attacks 
of  opportunity  against  you  until  the  start  of  its  next 
turn    . This effect is in addition to the normal benefits of a 
successful feint .
Tu  Mbl  Ing CraWl [MoveMen  T]
You can safely roll away from danger .
 Prerequisite: Tumble 5 ranks .
 Benefit: By succeeding on a DC 15 Tumble check, you 
can crawl 5 feet as a move action without provoking attacks 
of opportunity . Crawling normally provokes attacks of 
opportunity from any attackers who threaten you at any 
point during your crawl (PH 142)    .
TWI  sTed Charge [MoveMen  T]
You can charge in a crooked line .
 Prerequisite: Balance 5 ranks, Tumble 5 ranks .
 Benefit: When you charge, you can make one turn of 
up to 90 degrees during your movement . You can’t move 
more than your speed as part of this charge . All other 
restrictions on charges still apply, and you must have line 
of sight to the opponent at the start of your turn .
uP The hIll [MoveMen  T]
You can move quickly up a slope .
 Prerequisite: Balance 5 ranks, Jump 5 ranks .
 Benefit: You can move up a steep slope or stairs at your 
normal speed instead of at half speed . This effect lasts for 
1 round .
Walk The Walls [MoveMen  T]
You can run straight up a wall for a few seconds .
 Prerequisite: Climb 12 ranks, Tumble 5 ranks .
 Benefit: You can move up a wall without making a 
Climb check . Each 5 feet of vertical movement costs you 
4 squares of movement, and you must begin and end your 
turn on a horizontal surface .
Wall JuMP  er [MoveMen  T]
There’s no better way to end a tough climb than by leaping 
from the wall .
 Prerequisite: Climb 5 ranks, Jump 5 ranks .
 Benefit: If you have succeeded on a Climb check to 
ascend or descend a wall during this or your previous turn, 
you can leap horizontally from that wall as if you had a 
running start . 
WhIP ClIM ber [ManIP ulaTI  on]
You can use a whip as a grappling hook .
 Prerequisite: Use Rope 5 ranks, proficiency with 
the whip .
 Benefit: You can use a whip as a makeshift grappling 
hook, lashing it around a protrusion or other firm, weight-
bearing object in order to climb a wall or swing across a 
chasm . You make Climb checks using the whip as if it were 
a normal rope . Using this feat requires a Use Rope check 
as normal for securing a grappling hook (PH 86) but takes 
only a move action .
Lidda hurls herself from a wall to surprise an enemy
Illus. by C. Frank

any scoundrels trust to their luck and to the 
whims of fate, while others rely purely on 
their skills and physical abilities . Those who 
can, however, use magic . Magic is reliable, 
customizable, and easily concealable, all traits 
that scoundrels rely on . Scoundrels who are also spell-
casters naturally seek spells designed specifically for their 
needs . Such spells not only aid scoundrels in their many 
illicit trades, but also support the new rules for luck and 
skill tricks presented in Chapter 3 . 
  The new spells in this chapter are designed for the 
standard spellcasting classes from the Player’s Handbook, 
and by extension all other classes that use those spell lists . 
A few spells also support the assassin and the hexblade 
(Complete Warrior) .
The PolYMor  Ph subsChool
The polymorph subschool was introduced in Player’s 
Handbook II. 
  A spell of the polymorph subschool changes the target’s 
form from one shape to another . Unless stated otherwise 
in the spell’s description, the target of such a spell takes on 
all the statistics (mental and physical) and special abilities 
of an average member of the new form in place of its own, 
except as follows .
•  The target retains its own alignment (and personality, 
within the limits of the new form’s ability scores) .
•  The target retains its own hit points .
•  The target is treated as having its normal Hit Dice 
for the purpose of adjudicating effects based on HD, 
such as the sleep spell, though it uses the new form’s 
base attack bonus, base save bonuses, and all other 
statistics derived from Hit Dice .
•  The target retains the ability to understand the 
languages it understands in its normal form . If 
the new form is normally capable of speech, the 
target retains the ability to speak these languages as 
well    . It can write in the languages it understands, 
but only if the new form is capable of writing in 
some manner (even a primitive manner, such as 
drawing in the dirt with a paw) .
In all other ways, the target’s normal game statistics 
are effectively replaced by those of the new form . 
The target loses all the special abilities it has in its 
normal form, including its class features (even if 
the new form would normally be able to use those 
class features) .
  If  the  new  form’s  size  is  different  from  the 
target’s normal size, its new space must share as 
much of the original form’s space as possible, 
1
Illus. by D. Bircham

2